Creativity Use Summary
Identify the problem you want to address.
You rst use strategies to look at the problem in di erent way.
Then you make the problem visual in some way.
Next you generate ideas. Using thinking uently. And tact on incorporating randomness into your idea
generating process.

1. SEEING WHAT NO ONE ELSE IS SEEING
Knowing How to See
Genius often comes from nding a new perspective that no one else has taken.
Before you brainstorm any problem, restate the problem at least ve to ten times to generate
multiple perspectives. The emphasis is not so much on the right problem de nition but on
alternative problem de nitions. Sooner or later, you’l nd one that you are comfortable with. Fol
owing are several different ways to restructure your problem:
Make it more global and speci c.
1. Perceive Different Levels of Abstraction - Ask “Why?” four or ve times until you nd
the level where you’re comfortable.
2. If Dif cult to think about the whole Problem take a less global approach - Ask who,
what, where, when, why, and how
Separate the parts from the whole.
1. Fishbone Diagram
Change the words in some fashion.
1. Change Problem Statement Keywords 5-10 times (easy focus on verbs)
2. Play with Verbs And Nouns
3. Transpose The Words
4. One Word Technique
5. Word Chain

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

ff

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Make positive action statements.

1. Positive Action Statement
Switch perspective
1. Switching Gender
2. Friends and Enemies
Use multiple perspectives.
1. Da Vinvi’s Multiple Perspectives (single and group technique)
2. Take On a different Roles
3. Imagine You Are The Problem
Use questions.
1. Bold Questions
2. Think Like A Child
3. Playful Questions
4. Color Questions

Making Your Thought Visible
Diagram Your Thinking
1. Mind Mapping
2. Group Mind Maps
3. Variations
4. Picasso’s technique
Theme Mapping
1. Lotus Blossom
2. System Mapping
Diagramming Extreme Conditions
1. Force Field Analysis

Visual Brainstorming
1. Drawing Technique
2. In Groups

2. THINKING WHAT NO ONE ELSE IS THINKING
Possibility thinking (maximum number of ideas) then practicality thinking. After you’ve created
the maximum number of ideas possible, you change your strategy to practicality thinking, the
evaluation and judgment of ideas, to nd the ideas that have the most value to you.

Thinking Fluently
True-North Thinking
Gear Your thinking with compass principles that point you always in the right direction.
Defer Judgment
Possibility thinking
Possibility thinking is the raw generation of ideas, without judgment or evaluation of any kind.
List your ideas
1. Write out your ideas
Elaborate on Your Ideas
1. SCAMPER,
2. Take it apart
Written Records,
1. Eddison’s notebook style
2. Mind Popping

Making Novel Combinations
Listed Techniques Without sub header
1. Da Vinci’s Technique

fi

•Inventive Problem Solving

• Key Word Combinations
2. Combining Existing Information
3. Combining the unrelated
• Objects from unrelated elds
• Subjects from Unrelated Fields
4. Combining Problems
5. Combine Ideas
6. Combine Elements of Extreme Ideas
Combining Words,
1. Main Verb and Noun
2. Apart + Random Combination
3. Generation Combination
Combine Multiple Perspectives
1. SIL,
2. The Exquisite Corpse (Group)
Combine Talent
1. Left-Brainers and Right Brainers
2. Elicit Ideas From People In Other Fields
3. Asking Another Department To Join Your Group

Connecting the Unconnected
Listed Techniques Without sub header
1. Tetherball Analogy
• Concentrating On Ideas Simultaneously and letting them combine organically
2. Random Objects

fi

• Thought Walk

• Newspapers And Magazines
3. The Dreamer, The Realist, And The Critic
4. Wishes
5. Paper Airplanes
6. Rational Words
Thinking Unpredictably,
1. Random Words
• Random Words List
• Random Draw
• Dictionary
• Other Resources
Connecting Anything
1.

List Colored Items

2. Five Senses
3. Visuals
4. Picture Portfolios
5. Children's Drawings

Looking at the Other Side
Listed Techniques Without sub header
1. Seeing All Sides
2. Thinking Paradoxivally
3. Working Backwards,
• Tesla Variation
•Group Variation
•The Perfect Cup of Coffee

Reversals
1. Reversing Assumptions + Group Version
2. Reversing Perspective
3. Reverse Brainstorming

Looking in Other Worlds
Listed Techniques Without sub header
4.

Looking Into Other Worlds
• Parallel Worlds & Group Variations Big & Small

5. World Of Essences
6. Worlds Of Special Interest & Group Variation
7. The World Of Nature
8. The World Of Imagination & Group Variation
9. The World Of Einstein
10. World Of Images Symbol and Alternate Variation
11. Pattern Language
12. Sand Tray & Group Variation
13. Metaphoric Collage & Group Variation
14. Metaphor Walk
15. Photo Walk

Finding What You Are Not Looking For
Listed Techniques Without sub header
1. PMI
• Group Variation
2. Latent Potential - All the ways something could be used (tire sandals)

• Recycling,
3. Don’t Think About it Abstraction
• Group Variation
•Progressively More Abstract
4. Making A Find
• Group Variation
5. Unrelated Ideas Game
Fantasy
1. Fantasy Envelopes
2. Crossbreeding Subjects
Chance Favors the Prepared Mind
1. Opportunity Headlines
2. Chance Arrangements
3. Group Variation

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
Listed Techniques Without sub header
4. The Spirit of Koinonia
5. Environment
6. Facilitator,
7. Stating the Problem,
8. Idea Production,
9. Elaboration
10. Clarifying Thinking
11. Recording
12. Evaluation

Playfulness
Group Brainstorming Techniques,
1. Brainwriting
2. Idea Pool
3. Gallery
4. Three Plus
5. Air Planes
6. Wall Of Ideas
7. Notebooks
8. Two Week Brainstorming
9. Mixed Sessions
10. Clustering
11. Open Meetings
12. KJ Brainstorming
13. NHK
14. Storyboarding

What is creativity?

Creative ideas are unpredictable. Sometimes they even seem to be impossible – and yet
they happen.
Creativity is the ability to come up with ideas or artefacts that are new, surprising and
valuable. ‘Ideas’ here include concepts, poems, musical compositions, scienti c
theories, cookery recipes, choreography, jokes – and so on. ‘Artefacts’ include
paintings, sculptures, steam engines, vac- uum cleaners, pottery, origami, penny
whistles – and many other things you can name.
As these very diverse examples suggest, creativity enters into virtually every aspect of
life.
Creative ideas, then, are new. But of course, there’s new – and there’s new. Ask a
teacher, for instance. Children can come up with ideas that are new to them, even
though they may have been in the textbooks for years.
What you might do – and what I think you should do in this situation – is make a
distinction between ‘psychological’ creativity and ‘historical’ creativity (P-creativity
and H-creativity, for short). P–creativity involves coming up with a surprising, valuable
idea that’s new to the person who comes up with it. It doesn’t matter how many people
have had that idea before. But if a new idea is H–creative, that means that (so far as we
know) no one else has had it before: it has arisen for the rst time in human history.
H-creativity is what’s important. And in daily life we appreciate it too: it really isn’t
true that ‘The old jokes are the best ones’. But for someone who is trying to understand
the psychology of creativity, it’s P-creativity that’s crucial. Never mind who thought of
the idea rst: how did that person manage to come up with it, given that they had never
thought of it before?
If ‘new’, in this context, has two importantly different meanings, ‘surprising’ has three.
An idea may be surprising because it’s unfamiliar, or even unlikely – like a hundred-toone outsider winning the Derby. This sort of surprise goes against statistics.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

The second sort of surprise is more interesting. An unexpected idea may ‘ t’ into a
style of thinking that you already had – but you’re surprised because you hadn’t
realized that this particular idea was part of it. Maybe you’re even intrigued to nd that
an idea of this general type ts into the familiar style.

And the third sort of surprise is more interesting still: this is the aston- ishment you feel
on encountering an apparently impossible idea. It just couldn’t have entered anyone’s
head, you feel – and yet it did. It may even engender other ideas which, yesterday,
you’d have thought equally impossible.

‘What is going on’ isn’t magic – and it’s different in each type of case. For creativity
can happen in three main ways, which correspond to the three sorts of surprise.
The rst involves making unfamiliar combinations of familiar ideas.
Think of a physicist comparing an atom to the solar system, for instance, or a journalist
comparing a politician with a decidedly non-cuddly animal.
In all these cases, making – and also appreciating – the novel combin- ation requires a
rich store of knowledge in the person’s mind, and many different ways of moving
around within it.
The other two types of creativity are interestingly different from the rst. They involve
the exploration, and in the most surprising cases the transformation, of conceptual
spaces in people’s minds.
Conceptual spaces are structured styles of thought. They are normally picked up from
one’s own culture or peer group, but are occasionally borrowed from other cultures.
In either case, they are already there: they aren’t originated by one individual mind.
They include ways of writing prose or poetry; styles of sculpture, painting or music;
theories in chem- istry or biology; fashions in couture or choreography, nouvelle
cuisine and good old meat and two veg – in short, any disciplined way of thinking that
is familiar to (and valued by) a certain social group. - models of groups

fi

fi

fi

fi

Within a given conceptual space many thoughts are possible, only some of which may
actually have been thought. Some spaces, of course, have a richer potential than others.
Noughts and crosses is such a restricted style of game-playing that every possible move
has already been made countless times. But that’s not true of chess, where the num- ber
of possible moves, though nite, is astronomically large. And if some sub-areas of
chemistry have been exhausted (every possible molecule of that type having been
identi ed), the space of possible limericks, or sonnets, has not – and never will be.

But you’d never noticed them before – and you wouldn’t have done so now, if you
hadn’t got into an exploratory frame of mind.
In exploratory creativity, the ‘countryside’ is a style of thinking. Instead of exploring a
structured geographical space, you explore a structured conceptual space, mapped by a
particular style of painting, perhaps, or a speci c area of theoretical chemistry.

Transforming the space
What the street artists may also do is realize the limitations of their style.
Give or take a few years, and ignoring earthquake and ood, the country roads are
xed. Certainly, you can’t change them. Your Ordnance Survey map is reliable not only
because it’s right but because it stays right
But the maps inside our heads, and favoured by our communities, can change – and it’s
creative thinking which changes them.
The street artist, then – or Picasso, in a similar position – has an opportunity. In
principle, he (or, as always, she) could do the psycho- logical equivalent of adding roof
extensions or building a new road (a new technique, leading to new possibilities), or
even re-routing the motorway.
Re-routing the motorway (in ‘real life’ as in the mind) is the most dif cult of all. The
surprises that would engender could be so great as to make the driver lose his bearings.
A given style of thinking, no less than a road system, can render certain thoughts
impossible – which is to say, unthinkable. The differ- ence, as remarked above, is that
thinking styles can be changed – some- times, in the twinkling of an eye.

fi

fl

The deepest cases of creativity involve someone’s thinking something which, with
respect to the conceptual spaces in their minds, they couldn’t have thought before.

fi

fi

Whatever the size of the space, someone who comes up with a new idea within that
thinking style is being creative in the second, explora- tory, sense. If the new idea is
surprising not just in itself but as an example of an unexpected general type, so much
the better. And if it leads on to others (still within the same space) whose possibility
was previously unsuspected, better still. Exploratory creativity is valuable because it
can enable someone to see possibilities they hadn’t glimpsed before. They may even
start to ask just what limits, and just what potential, this style of thinking has.

,

P

,

that creativity requires the

hidden combination of unconscious ideas. He distinguished four phases of creativity
(which Hadamard later named preparation, incubation, illumin- ation, and
veri cation), within which conscious and unconscious mental work gure to varying
extents.

The preparatory phase involves conscious attempts to solve the prob- lem, by using or
explicitly adapting familiar methods. Often, there is no
29
THE STORY SO FAR

apparent success: the experience is frustrating, because seemingly unproductive.
It is during the second phase, which may last for minutes or for months, that fruitful
novelties are initially generated. The conscious mind is focussed elsewhere, on other
problems, other projects – perhaps even on a sight-seeing trip. But below the level of
consciousness, Poincaré said, ideas are being continually combined with a freedom
denied to waking, rational, thought. (He insisted that incubation involves productive
mental work, not merely a refreshing rest; some evidence in his support is given in
Chapter 10.)
Next comes the ash of insight, to which – despite its unexpectedness
as a conscious experience – Poincaré ascribed a signi cant mental history: ‘sudden illumination [is] a manifest sign of long, unconscious prior
work

fi

fi



fi



























fl









fi



Finally, deliberate problem-solving takes over again, as the new conceptual insights are
itemized and tested. In science and mathematics, it is natural to speak of ‘veri cation’,
as Hadamard did; in the arts, the more general term ‘evaluation’ is better.

Academics also tried to measure the links between intel igence and genius. But intel igence is not
enough. Marilyn vos Savant, whose IQ of 228 is the highest ever recorded, has not contributed
much to science or art. She is, instead, a question-and-answer columnist for Parade magazine.
Run-of-the-mil physicists have IQs much higher than Nobel Prizewinner Richard Feynman,
whom many acknowledge to be the last great American genius (his IQ was a merely respectable
122).
Genius is not about scoring 1600 on the SATs, mastering ten languages at the age of seven,
nishing the New York Times crossword in record time, having an extraordinarily high IQ, or
even about being smart. After a considerable debate in the sixties, initiated by J. P. Guilford, a
leading psychologist who cal ed for a scienti c focus on creativity, psychologists reached the
conclusion that creativity is not the same as intel igence. An individual can be far more creative
than he or she is intel igent, or far more intel igent than creative.
Typical y, we think reproductively, on the basis of similar problems encountered in the past.
In contrast, geniuses think productively, not reproductively. When confronted with a problem,
they ask themselves how many different ways they can look the problem, how they can rethink
it, and how many different ways they can solve it, instead of asking how they have been taught to
solve it.
reproductive thinking fosters rigidity of thought, which is why we so often fail when confronted
with a new problem that is super cial y similar to past experiences, but is different from
previously encountered problems in its deep structure.
Once we have an idea we think works, it becomes hard for us to consider alternative ideas. We
tend to develop narrow ideas about what wil work or what can be done and stick with it until
proven wrong. Genius, on the other hand, operates more in accordance with the laws of
biological evolution.
I have always been impressed by Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection and am
fascinated with scholastic attempts to apply Darwinian ideas to creativity and genius.
This book presents the thinking strategies of creative giants from the sciences, arts, and industry.
They most notably include Einstein, Darwin, da Vinci, Freud, Picasso, Edison, Mozart, Richard
Feynman, Louis Pasteur, Galileo, Walt Whitman, Niels Bohr, Alexander Graham Bel , Aristotle,
Alexander Fleming, Michelangelo, Bach, George Westinghouse, Nikola Tesla, Walt Disney,
Martha Graham, T. S. Eliot, Paul Cézanne, Newton, David Bohm, Stravinsky, Tennyson, Edgar
Al an Poe, Jonas Salk, and Bertrand Russel , among others.

fi

When you use the techniques, you wil rethink the way you see things and wil look at the world in
a different way.

fi

fi

This fourfold analysis is no romantic hymn to the supreme majesty of the unconscious.
Rather the reverse:

It is not enough to understand the strategies. To create original ideas and creative solutions, you
must use the techniques.
Knowing How to See. Genius often comes from nding a new perspective that no one else has
taken. Leonardo da Vinci believed that to gain knowledge about the form of problems, you begin
by learning how to restructure it in many different ways. He felt the rst way he looked at a
problem was too biased toward his usual way of seeing things. He would restructure his problem
by looking at it from one perspective and move to another perspective and stil another. With each
move, his understanding would deepen, and he would begin to understand the essence of the
problem. Einstein’s theory of relativity is, in essence, a description of the interaction between
different perspectives. Freud’s analytical methods were designed to nd details that did not t
with traditional perspectives in order to nd a completely new point of view.
Perhaps most tel ing about geniuses is that they do not approach problems reproductively, that is,
on the basis of similar problems encountered in the past. Interpreting problems through past
experience wil , by de nition, lead the thinker astray. In order to creatively solve a problem, the
thinker must abandon the initial approach that stems from past experience and reconceptualize
the problem. By not settling with one perspective, geniuses do not merely solve existing
problems, like discovering a cure for cancer. They identify new ones. It does not take a genius to
analyze dreams; it required Freud to ask in the rst place what meaning dreams carry from the
psyche.
Making Your Thought Visible
Once geniuses obtain a certain minimal verbal facility, they seem to develop a skil in visual and
spatial abilities that gives them the exibility to display information in different ways. When
Einstein had thought through a problem, he always found it necessary to formulate his subject in
as many different ways as possible, including diagrammatical y. He had a very visual mind. He
thought in terms of visual and spatial forms, rather than thinking along purely mathematical or
verbal lines of reasoning. In fact, he believed that words and numbers, as they are written or
spoken, did not play a signi cant role in his thinking process.
Thinking What No One Else Is Thinking
“Thinking Fluently,” presents a set of timeless and solid principles on how to produce a quantity
of ideas. In addition to producing many ideas, an important aspect of genius is the means to
produce original and novel variations in ideas, and for this variation to be truly effective, it must
be “blind.” The next ve strategies, “Making Novel Combinations,” “Connecting the
Unconnected,” “Looking at the Other Side,”
“Looking in Other Worlds,” and “Finding What You’re Not Looking For,” demonstrate how
geniuses get novel and original ideas by incorporating chance or randomness into the creative
process in order to destabilize their existing patterns of thinking and reorganize their thoughts in
new ways.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

The last strategy, “Awakening the Col aborative Spirit,” presents the conditions for effective
group brainstorming and a col ection of world-class brainstorming techniques.

Thinking Fluently. A distinguishing characteristic of genius is immense productivity. Thomas
Edison held 1,093 patents, stil the record. He guaranteed productivity by giving himself and his
assistants idea quotas. His own personal quota was one minor invention every ten days and a
major invention every six months. Bach wrote a cantata every week, even when he was sick or
exhausted. Mozart produced more than six hundred pieces of music. Einstein is best known for
his paper on relativity, but he published 248 other papers. T. S. Eliot’s numerous drafts of “The
Waste Land” constitute a jumble of good and bad passages that
eventual y was turned into a masterpiece.
eventual y was turned into a masterpiece.
Nature creates many possibilities and then lets the process of natural selection decide which
species survive. Most do not survive; in fact, 95 percent of new species fail and die in a short
period of time. In a study of 2,036 scientists throughout history, Dean Keith Simonton found that
the most respected produced not only more great works, but also more “bad” ones. Out of their
massive quantity of work came quality.
Making Novel Combinations. In his 1988 book, Scienti c Genius, Dean Keith Simonton of the
University of California, Davis, suggests that geniuses are geniuses because they form more
novel combinations than the merely talented. His theory has etymology behind it: Cogito—“I
think” “—original y connoted “shake together.” Intelligo, the root of intelligence, means to
“select among.” This is a clear early intuition about the utility of permitting ideas and thoughts to
randomly combine with each other and the utility of selecting from the many the few to retain.
Like the highly intel igent child with a pail of Legos, a genius is constantly combining and
recombining ideas, images, and thoughts into different combinations in their conscious and
subconscious minds. Consider Einstein’s equation, E=mc2. Einstein did not invent the concepts
of energy, mass, or speed of light. Rather, by combining these concepts in a novel way, he was
able to look at the same world as everyone else and see something different. Einstein vaguely
referred to the way he thought as “combinatory play.” In fact, combinatory play seemed to be the
essential feature in his productive thought.
Connecting the Unconnected. If one particular style of thought stands out for creative geniuses, it
is the ability to make juxtapositions that elude mere mortals. Cal it a facility to connect the
unconnected by forcing relationships that enable them to see things to which others are blind.
Leonardo da Vinci forced a relationship between the sound of a bel and a stone hitting water.
This enabled him to make the connection that sound travels in waves.

fi

fi

Looking at the Other Side. Physicist and philosopher David Bohm believed geniuses were able to
think different thoughts because they could tolerate ambivalence between opposite or
incompatible subjects. Dr. Albert Rothenberg, a noted researcher on the creative process,
identi ed this ability in a wide variety of geniuses, including Einstein, Mozart, Edison, Pasteur,
Joseph Conrad, Picasso, and Niels Bohr. Bohr believed that if you held opposites together, then
you suspend your thought and your mind moves to a new level. The suspension of thought al
ows an intel igence beyond thought to act and create a new form. The swirling of opposites
creates the conditions for a new point of view to bubble freely from your mind. Bohr’s ability to

imagine light as both a particle and a wave led to his conception of the principle of
complementarity.
Looking in Other Worlds. Aristotle considered metaphor a sign of genius, believing that the
individual who had the capacity to perceive resemblances between two separate areas of
existence was a person of special gifts. If unlike things are real y alike in some ways, perhaps
they are so in others. Alexander Graham Bel observed the comparison between the inner
workings of the ear and the movement of a stout piece of membrane to move steel and conceived
the telephone. Thomas Edison invented the phonograph, in one day, after developing an analogy
between a toy funnel and the motions of a paper man and sound vibrations.
Finding What You Are Not Looking For . Whenever we attempt something and fail, we end up
doing something else. As simplistic as this statement may seem, it is the rst principle of creative
accident. We may ask ourselves why we have failed to do what we intended—and this is the
reasonable, expected thing to do—but the creative accident provokes a different question: What
have we done?
Answering that question in a novel, unexpected way is an essential creative act. It is not luck, but
creative insight of the highest order.
Alexander Fleming was not the rst physician to notice the mold that formed on an exposed
culture while studying deadly bacteria. A less gifted physician would have trashed this seemingly
irrelevant event, but Fleming noted it as “interesting” and wondered if it had potential. This
“interesting” observation led to penicil in, which has saved mil ions of lives.
Awakening the Collaborative Spirit. The notion that the col ective intel igence of a group is
larger than the intel igence of an individual can be traced back to primitive times when huntergatherer bands would meet to discuss and solve common problems.
A cataract builds over time and its effects become obvious slowly, because the change goes
almost unnoticed until the cataract reduces vision signi cantly. Likewise, the habits and routines
with which we approach problems gradual y accumulate until they signi cantly reduce our
awareness of other possibilities. Our original creativity eventual y yields to routine and habit.
Fortunately, we can remove our habitual ways of perceiving and thinking by changing our
perspectives and learning how to look at our problems in many different ways.
The strategies in Part I demonstrate how creative geniuses generate a rich variety of different
perspectives by representing a problem in different ways. They include the fol owing:
• Restating a problem many different ways
• Diagramming, mapping, and drawing a problem

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Imagine you had a bag of black gum bal s and just one white gum bal . The chances of picking
the white gum bal would be low. If you added ve more white gum bal s to the bag, your chances
of picking a white one would increase. If you added ten more white gum bal s, your chances

would increase even more. Looking at a problem in different ways is as de nite a procedure as
putting more white bal s into the bag. Each time you look at a problem in a different way, you
increase your probability of discovering the unique perspective or insight that wil lead to the
breakthrough idea.
Have you ever looked closely at the wheels on a railroad train? They are anged. That is, they
have a lip on the inside to prevent the train from sliding off the track. Original y train wheels
were not anged. Instead, the railroad tracks were. The problem of railroad safety had been
expressed
“How can the tracks be made safer for trains to ride on?” Hundreds of thousands of miles of
track were manufactured with an unnecessary steel lip.
Only when the problem was rede ned—”How can the wheels be made to stay on the track more
securely?”—was the anged wheel invented.
To start with, it’s helpful to phrase problems in a particular way. Write the problem you want to
solve as a de nite question. Use the phrase “In what ways might I ...?” to start a problem
statement. This is sometimes known as the invitational stem and helps keep you from settling on
a problem statement that may re ect only one perception of the problem.
For example, in the series of letters below, cross out six letters to make a common word.
CSRIEXLEATTTERES
If you state the problem as “How can I cross out six letters to form a common word?” you’l nd
it dif cult to solve. If, instead, you framed it “In what ways might I cross out six letters to form a
common word?” you wil likely nd yourself inspired to think of many alternative possible
solutions, including the solution which is to literal y cross out the letters S, I, X, L, E, T, T, and so
on, leaving the word “CREATE.”
A number of experiments have shown the signi cance of language for problem solving. Adults
who write out or verbalize problems perform far better than those who silently go about the job.
As a boy, Einstein had a favorite uncle, Jakob, who taught him mathematics by changing the
content of the exercises. For example, he would present algebra as a game about hunting a smal
mystery animal (X). When you bag your game (solve the problem), you pounce on it and give it
its right name. By changing the content and converting math into a game, he taught Einstein to
approach problems as play rather than work.
It’s the context of the information that inclines you to describe an input in a certain way and
perhaps to abandon an initial description for another.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fl

fl

fi

fl

fi

The more times you state a problem in a different way, the more likely it is that your perspective
wil change and deepen. When Einstein thought about a problem, he always found it necessary to
formulate his subject in as many different ways as possible. He was once asked what he would
do if he was told that a huge comet would hit and total y destroy the earth in one hour. Einstein

said he would spend fty- ve minutes guring out how to formulate the question and ve
minutes solving it.
Before you brainstorm any problem, restate the problem at least ve to ten times to generate
multiple perspectives. The emphasis is not so much on the right problem de nition but on
alternative problem de nitions. Sooner or later, you’l nd one that you are comfortable with. Fol
owing are several different ways to restructure your problem:
• Make it more global and speci c. • Separate the parts from the whole.
• Change the words in some fashion. • Make positive action statements.
• Switch perspective.
• Use multiple perspectives.
• Use questions.
Global and Speci c Abstractions
One can always look at anything from different levels of abstraction. A very detailed description
of a beach would include every position of every grain of sand. Viewed from a higher vantage
point, the details become smeared together, the grains become a smooth expanse of brown. At
this level of description, different qualities emerge: the shape of the coastline, the height of the
dunes, and so on.
Einstein despaired of creating new knowledge from already existing knowledge. How, he
thought, can the conclusion go beyond the premises? So he reversed this procedure and worked
at a higher level of abstraction. This bold stance enabled him to creatively examine rst
principles (for example, the constancy of the speed of light independent of relative motion).
Einstein took as his starting premise and simply reasoned from the abstractions what others were
not wil ing to accept because the abstractions could not be demonstrated by experimentation.
It’s important to spend time rephrasing problems in both more global and more speci c ways.
More speci c problem statements lead to quicker solutions but less conceptual creativity than
general statements. Think of the difference between cleaning up the oil spil ed on your drive-way
and the problem of environmental pol ution, or the difference between developing a new
computer keyboard and developing a new niche in the global information business.
Look for the appropriate level of abstraction, the best viewpoint from which to gather ideas.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

n the 1950s, experts believed that the oceangoing freighter was dying. Costs were rising, and it
took longer and longer to get merchandise delivered. The shipping industry experts downsized
the crew and built faster ships that required less fuel. Costs stil kept going up, but the industry
kept focusing its efforts on reducing speci c costs related to ships while at sea and while
working.

This al owed the shipping companies to consider al aspects of shipping, including loading and
stowing. The innovation that saved the industry was to separate loading from stowing, by doing
the loading on land, before the ship is in port. It is much quicker to put on and take off preloaded
freight. The answers were the rol - on/rol -off ship and the container ship. Port time has been
reduced by three-quarters, and with it, congestion and theft. Freighter traf c has increased
vefold in the last thirty years, and costs are down by 60 percent.
Freud believed that one of the keys to his genius was his ability to widen problems and make
them more abstract and complex.
When he widened his problem space and made it more abstract, he would identify what he cal ed
his “missing links” (gaps of information). Once he identi ed the “missing links,” he utilized his
imagination, using what he cal ed “free creation,” to interpret the meaning of these missing links.
These interpretations would sometimes lead to a new approach to a problem.

Knowing How To See T -

To nd the appropriate level

of abstraction, ask “Why?” four or ve times, until you nd the level where you’re comfortable.
Suppose your chal enge is “In what ways might I sel more Chevrolet Luminas?”
Step One: Why do you want to sel more Luminas? “Because my car sales are down.”
Step Two: Why do you want to sel more cars? “To improve my overal sales.”
Step Three: Why do you want to improve overal sales? “To improve my business.”
Step Four: Why do you want to improve your business? “To increase my personal wealth.”
Step Five: Why do you want to improve your personal wealth? “To lead the good life.”
Now you shape your chal enge in a variety of ways:

fi

fi

fi

fi

In what ways might I sel more Luminas?
In what ways might I sel more cars?
In what ways might I improve overal sales?
In what ways might I improve my business?
In what ways might I improve my personal wealth? In what ways might I lead the good life?
Look for the level of abstraction where you’re comfortable. You may choose to stick with the
original chal enge of sel ing more Luminas, or you may choose a more global chal enge of
improving your personal wealth. By phrasing the problems as improving your personal wealth,
you are free to embrace more opportunities. You could negotiate a higher commission return for
each vehicle sold, go into another business, make investments, sel other products, and so on.

fi

fi

A ship is capital equipment and the biggest cost for capital equipment is the cost of not working,
because interest has to be paid without income being generated to pay for it. Final y, an outside
consultant globalized the chal enge to “In what ways might the shipping industry reduce costs?”

Knowing How To See T -

If you nd it dif cult to think

about the whole problem, take a less global approach. Try focusing on one part at a time. Identify
each part as a subproblem.
The more speci cal y you de ne your chal enge, the easier it is to generate ideas. Ask who, what,
where, when, why, and how.
Who helps you identify individuals and groups who might be involved in your chal enge, have
special strengths or resources or access to useful information, and who might gain from a
resolution of the problem.
What helps identify al the things involved in the situation: the requirements, dif culties involved,
rewards, and advantages and disadvantages of formulating a resolution.
Where considers the places, locations, and focal points of the problems.
When probes the schedules, dates, and timeliness of the situation.
Why helps you reach an understanding of your basic objective.
How helps you recognize how the situation developed, actions that may have been attempted or
are now occurring, and steps that might be taken.
Fishbone Diagrams
Professor Kaoru Ishikawa of the University of Tokyo incorporated this strategy in his Ishikawa
diagram, which is commonly known as the “ shbone” diagram because of its unique shape.
In a typical diagram, minor causes are clustered around four major cause categories. For
example, common major cause categories in the manufacturing process might be “materials,”
“people,”
“methods,” and “machinery,” and major cause categories in public education might be
“teachers,” “methods,” “environment,” “students,” and “policies.”

Knowing How To See T -

Suppose we want to improve

creativity in our organization. Fol owing are guidelines for shboning the situation:
1. Our effect would be “perfect organizational creativity.” We would write this in the box on the
right (the sh’s head). A straight line is drawn to the left to resemble the backbone of the sh.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

2. The next step is to brainstorm the major cause categories. What are the major causes that
would produce perfect organizational creativity? You can have as many major causes as are
warranted. There are typical y three to six. We decide that the four major categories for
organizational creativity are “People,” “Environment,” “Materials,” and “Policies.” The major
cause categories become the ribs of the sh.

3. Minor causes are then grouped around the major causes as sh bones. “Train to be creative”
would be a bone attached to the “People” rib, and “stimulating” would be a bone attached to the
“Environment” rib.
4. For each minor cause, ask, “How can we make this happen?” Then post the response as
branches off the bones. “Hire an outside expert to conduct the training” would be a branch off
the “Train” bone.
To shbone an existing problem, you write the problem in the sh’s head, identify the major
cause categories of the problem, and group minor causes around the ribs. Then for each minor
cause, ask, “Why does this happen?” Post the responses as branches off the appropriate bone.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Fishboning al ows you to see the relationships between causes and effects, al ows you to
consider al the different parts of a situation, and al ows you to identify those areas where you
need more data or information. It also triggers your subconscious. Ishikawa described the
process as one in which you shbone your problem and let it cook overnight. When you come
back to it, you’l be amazed at the new thoughts and ideas that your subconscious has cooked up.

Aristotle believed that the words and chains of words that we use in framing a problem play a
signi cant role in the way we approach problems.
The wording of the problem in uences us to come up with the incorrect answer.
Thought is uid. When you frame a problem in words, you crystal ize your thoughts.
Words give articulation and precision to vague images and hazy intuitions. But a crystal is no
longer uid and committing yourself to the rst words that come to mind may disrupt your
thought process.
standard explanations were just as hol ow to Feynman. When someone told him that friction
makes shoe leather wear out, his response was “Shoe leather wears out because it rubs against
the sidewalk, and the little notches and bumps on the sidewalk grab pieces and pul them off.”
Always try to rephrase a problem in your own words, without using de nitions.
Change the Words

fi

fi

fl

fl

fl

fi

For every word a person uses, psychologists say there is a mediating response that provides the
meaning of that concept for that individual.

Just what the mediating responses are for al words is not known. Many times they may not be
responses in the usual sense but al provide meaning for individuals When you change the words
in your problem statement you initiate an unobservable process in your mind that may lead to a
new thought or idea.
A few years back, Toyota asked employees for ideas on how they could become more
productive. They received few suggestions. They reworded the question to “How can you make
your job easier?” They were inundated with ideas. Even tiny changes can lead to unpredictable,
cataclysmic results. In a sentence, one can randomly change a single letter and alter the way
every other word is used. “The kids are ying planes”
becomes “The lids are ying planes.”

Knowing How To See T -

A simple change of words or

the order of words in a problem statement wil stimulate your imagination by adding new
dimensions of meaning.
Consider the statement “Two hundred were kil ed out of six hundred,” as compared to “Four
hundred were spared out of six hundred.”
Examine your problem statement, identify the key words, and change them ve to ten times to
see what results. One of the easiest words to change is the verb. Suppose you want to increase
sales. Look at the changing perspectives as the verb is changed in the fol owing: In what ways
might I increase sales?
In what ways might I attract sales?
In what ways might I develop sales?
In what ways might I extend sales?
In what ways might I repeat sales?
In what ways might I keep sales? Magnify sales? Restore sales? Target sales? Inspire sales?
Cycle sales? Encourage sales? Grow sales? Copy sales? Complement sales? Acquire sales? Vary
sales? Spotlight sales? Motivate sales? Prepare sales? Renew sales? Force sales? Organize sales?
And so on.

Knowing How To See T -

Play with Verbs and Nouns

fi

fl

fl

Playing with verbs and nouns encourages you to think of perspectives that you would probably
not think of spontaneously. Try changing the nouns into verbs and verbs into nouns in your
problem statement. For example, a problem might be “How can I sel more bottles?” Changing
the verbs into nouns and nouns into verbs makes this into “How can I bottle more sales?”
Bottling sales now suggests looking for ways to close sales, instead of ways to sel more bottles.

The problem “How can I improve customer relations?” becomes “How can I customize related
improvements?” This new perspective leads one to consider customizing products and services
for customers, customizing al relevant aspects of the customer relations department, or other
customizations.
Another way to change your perspective is to substitute an antonym for the noun. If your
problem is “How can I increase sales?,” convert sales to its antonym, “expenditures.” The new
line of speculation now becomes one of spending more to get more: Should we budget more
money in our sales budget? Should we sel higher quality products? Should we buy more
advertising? And so on.

Knowing How To See T -

Transpose the Words

One of Aristotle’s favorite ways to test a premise was what he cal ed “convertibility.” He felt that
if a premise were true, then the reverse premise should be convertible. For example, if every
pleasure is good, some good must be pleasure.
Sometimes changing the order of words in a problem statement will create a verbal-conceptual
chain that may trigger a different perspective.
In the following illustration, words were arranged in two different series, A and B, and subjects
were asked to solve certain situations. When
“skyscraper” was listed rst, subjects tended to come up with architectural concepts, and when
“prayer” was transposed with “skyscraper” and listed rst, it
increased the likelihood of a religious direction.
Series A
Series B
Skyscraper Prayer
Prayer
Skyscraper
Temple
Temple
Cathedral
Cathedral
Transpose the words in your problem. Following are some examples:

fi

fi

In what ways might I get a promotion?
In what ways might I promote myself?
In what ways might I advertise my T-shirts?
In what ways might I use my T-shirts to advertise? In what ways might I learn how to use the
Internet? In what ways might I use the Internet to learn more?

A very simple change in the way something is stated can have a profound effect. One of the most
effective medical discoveries of al time came about when Edward Jenner transposed his problem
from why people got smal pox to why dairy workers apparently did not. From the discovery that
harmless cowpox gave protection against deadly smal pox came vaccination and the end of smal
pox as a scourge in the Western world.

Knowing How To See T -

One-Word Technique

According to Aristotle, words are sounds that become symbols of mental experience through the
process of association. The most striking characteristic of the poetry of Shakespeare and Milton
is the words they chose to build up a chain of associations in the reader’s mind. The effect of
their masterpieces was produced not so much by what they expressed, as by what they suggested,
not so much by the ideas they conveyed, as by other ideas that were remotely connected with
them.
Try using the following technique to build up a chain of associations in your mind about your
subject. 1. Write down your problem in one sentence. Reduce it to one word.
2. What other words might be used? Look for synonyms in a thesaurus. Choose one.
3. What do you mean by that word? Fully describe the personal meaning of the word.
4. What is the dictionary de nition of the word? Does this add any new dimensions?
5. Within your description or the dictionary de nition, is there another word that better describes
the essence of your problem or intrigues you? 6. If so, repeat the process with the new word.
7. If not, did any of the explorations give you a new way of looking at the problem?

Knowing How To See T -

Word Chain

In an atomic pile, a chain reaction comes about when a particle splits off from one atom nucleus
and then col ides with another atom nucleus and dislodges a second particle, which in turn, col
ides with another nucleus. If the mass of material is large enough, the chain reaction becomes an
explosion. So it is with words. One new word can set off a reaction when it collides with another,
and a sort of creative chain reaction follows.
1. Ask yourself what the theme of your problem is right now. What one word describes the
current problem or situation you’re dealing with?
2. Write down the key word at the top of a page of paper.

fi

fi

fl

3. Then make a list of words that pop into your mind in connection with this word. Don’t think
about it. Let the words ow spontaneously. Let one word trigger another, and so on. Continue
this for a few minutes.

Positive Statements
In the Universe Within, Morton Hunt details experiments conducted by Herbert Clark at Stanford
University that demonstrate how thinking positively facilitates and speeds up thinking. In the
gure below, are the statements true or false?

Notice how much longer it takes to reply to the false statement than to the true one. We
instinctively assume statements are true.
It takes approximately a half second more, or longer, to verify denials than af rmations.
Try framing your problem statement as a positive action statement.

Knowing How To See T -

A positive action statement

has four parts:
1. The Action: The thing you want to do.
2. The Object: A thing or person you want to change.
3. The Qualifeer: The kind of action change you want.
4. The End Result: The result you expect to fol ow.
In what ways might I package (action) my book (object) more attractively (quali er) so people
wil buy more (end result)?
Next, rate the action statement on a scale of one to ten. This serves as a benchmark to assess the
probability of achieving workable solutions.

fi

fi

Shifting Perspective

fi

fi

4. Read over your word chain and write down your reactions and comments.
5. Look for a particular theme or issue that keeps recurring. These themes are worth exploring
for signi cance to the problem. If a particular word evokes a strong emotional reaction, it’s
worth exploring.

Our perceptual positions determine how we view things. Imagine that you are on the way to a
Broadway play with a pair of tickets that cost one hundred dol ars and discover you have lost the
tickets. Would you pay another one hundred dol ars? Now imagine you are on your way to the
theater to buy these tickets. Upon arrival, you realize you have lost one hundred dol ars in cash.
Would you now buy tickets to the play? Clearly, on an objective basis, the two situations are
identical —in both you are one hundred dol ars in the hole. Nevertheless, most people report that
they would be more likely to buy new tickets if they had lost the money than if they had lost the
tickets. The same loss is seen differently from two different perspectives. The loss of the cash has
comparatively little effect on whether one buys new tickets. On the other hand, the cost of the
lost tickets is viewed as “attending the theater” and one is loath to accept the doubling of the cost
of the play.
Because our perceptual positions determine how we view things, it’s important to learn how to
shift perspective and look at a subject in different ways. Walt Disney’s ability to identify with the
characters in his animated lms, as wel as with his audience, is a good example of this skil .
Einstein imagined riding on a light beam or in the reality of a two-dimensional being. Tesla, by
imagining himself living in the future, essential y took up a perceptual position in the future,
creating new realities from which to view the world.

Knowing How To See T -

Switching Gender

1. Close your eyes and relax.
2. Imagine yourself in the fol owing situations, one at a time, but imagine (physical y, emotional
y, mental y) you are of the opposite sex.
A. Walking down a street and running into a friend of the same sex you are imagining yourself as
being B. Walking down a street and running into a friend of the opposite sex you are imagining
yourself as being C. Being on a public beach, wearing a bathing suit
D. Being at work and dealing with members of the opposite sex
E. Being at a party, irting and dancing
F. Being out on a date with a special friend
G. Being at home, after you and your spouse have had a hard day
3. Open your eyes and now examine the business situation from the viewpoint of the opposite
sex. Ask yourself, “How would I view the situation if I were of the opposite sex?” Write down
everything that comes to mind.

fi

fi

fl

fi

Does taking the role of the other sex lead you to notice things you normal y would not? What, for
instance, do you nd yourself noticing and thinking about as a member of the opposite sex?
What are the differences? The similarities? Do you nd yourself approaching the situation
differently? Has your viewpoint changed? In what ways?

Knowing How To See T -

Friends and Enemies

Imagine yourself in one of two scenarios. First, imagine you’re the same sex as the other person.
The two of you are friends, and you’re leisurely walking side by side. You have a certain belief
about your subject, and you want your friend to believe it too. With these thoughts in mind,
imagine you turn to your friend. What do you say? How do you say it? Jot the answers to those
questions down on paper. Do they spark any new insights?
In the second scenario, imagine you’re the same sex, only this time the other person is not your
friend. You’re in a crowded, noisy restaurant. You know that the other person does not share your
beliefs about your subject, and you feel that it’s important for the company that this person adopt
these beliefs. Once again, what do you say? How do you say it? Jot down the answers and see if
they spark any new ideas.
The ideas stemming from the rst scenario should feel highly personalized and warm. Perhaps
your ideas wil include words or images that the other person can connect with and understand.
The ideas stemming from the second scenario wil probably be more bottom-line oriented and
impersonal. Perhaps they wil include an objective idea that the other person can readily
understand and accept.
Da Vinci’s Multiple Perspectives
Leonardo da Vinci equated comprehension of the deeper structure of his subject with having
multiple perspectives, speci cal y, from at least three different points of view.
Leonardo believed that until one perceived something from a minimum of three different
perspectives, one did not yet have a basis for understanding it.
A true and complete knowledge comes from the synthesizing of these views.

fi

fi

fi

In one study of beginning piano students, two groups were introduced to a simple C-major scale.
One group was told to learn the scale by responding to multiple perspectives, including thoughts
and feelings; the other group was told to practice the scale by the traditional memorization
through repetition. When the groups were evaluated, the psychologists found the playing of the
rst group to be much more competent and creative.

fi

fi

As you switch genders, notice how your attention and thoughts change. You might nd yourself,
for instance, rst thinking of competition as the spice of life and then shifting to regarding
cooperation as the highest value. Or you might change your value system from one that is
predicated on the past to one that emphasizes the values of the future. By turning things around
in your mind, you are breaking expectations in a variety of ways, which wil generate new ways
of looking at things.

Knowing How To See T -

Look at your problem using

multiple perspectives.
1. First, write the problem from your point of view.
2. Next, write the statement from the perspectives of at least two other people who are close to or
involved in the problem. 3. Synthesize the different perspectives into one al -inclusive problem
statement.
For instance, if you are starting a new business, write out your statement as you see it, then from
the point of view of your potential customers, your potential employees, your potential
competitions, and last, from the point of view of your banker. Synthesize these various
perspectives together into one al -inclusive statement.
An easy way to generate a multiplicity of perspectives when working in a smal group is to rst
give each participant ve cards and ask him or her to write ve different problem statements (one
statement per card). Col ect the cards and shuf e them.

Knowing How To See T -

Then, 1. Randomly distribute

three cards to each participant, taking care that no one gets his or her own cards. Ask everyone to
arrange them in order of personal preference. While participants are doing this, spread the
leftover cards on a table.
2. Ask participants to exchange cards they don’t like with those on the table.
3. Ask participants to exchange cards with each other. Every participant should exchange at least
one card and may exchange any number.
4. Form the group into three teams. Ask the teams to select three cards and discard the rest. Then,
ask the team to synthesize the remaining three cards into one problem statement.
5. Ask each team to present its problem statement to the group. Now, ask the entire group to
synthesize the three problem statements into one.
Take on a Different Role
Soren Kierkegaard, the nineteenth-century Danish philosopher, cal ed it the “rotation method.”
He was thinking of crops. You can’t grow corn inde nitely on the same eld; at some point, to
refresh the soil, you must plant hay. Similarly, to grow a different perspective, you wil nd it
helpful to adopt a different role.

Knowing How To See T -

Try taking on a different role

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

to get a different perspective. First, write your problem statement from your point of view. Then
write your statement in two of the fol owing ways:

How would a leader in your eld write it? How would a col ege professor write it?
How would a precocious child write it?
How would a risk-taking entrepreneur write it?
How would an evangelist write it? How would a politician write it? How would a physicist write
it? How would a psychologist write it? How would an explorer write it? How would a judge
write it? How would a rapper write it?
How would an investigative reporter write it?
As you write your statements, contemplate how each character would approach the problem.
What would they do? What are the differences? The similarities? Synthesize the three statements.
Can you merge them into one al -inclusive statement? Has your original perspective of the
problem changed?

Knowing How To See T -

Imagine You Are the

Problem
This is a favorite technique of T.A. Rich, a famous inventor at GE, who often develops a unique
perspective toward problems by imagining he is in the middle of the problem or is some aspect
of the problem. For example, he would try to think like an electron or he would imagine himself
as a light beam whose refraction is being measured. Einstein imagined he was riding a beam of
light hurtling through space, which led him to the theory of relativity. By becoming part of the
problem, you can discover new and original thoughts.
Try to imagine yourself as some part of the problem and try to see the situation from its
perspective. Imagine that you are trying to design a new clock. Ask yourself what it would be
like to be the minute hand on a clock. Can you imagine yourself as a unit of time? How would an
hour feel? A minute? A second? What would it say to me if our positions were reversed? What
would it say to me if it could think and talk the way I can?
Identify with an object or process and try to see the problem from the perspective of the object or
process. Merge with the problem by asking yourself questions: How would I feel if I were ...?
What would it say to me if it were me?
How would I feel if I were the idea I am developing?
What recommendation would it make?
Questions
Certainly, a key characteristic of al geniuses is their intense childlike curiosity and a high degree
of inquiry.

fi

fi

genius comes more from asking bold questions than nding “right” answers.

Knowing How To See T -

Isolate the chal enge you

want to think about and dissect it in as many different ways as you can with the fol owing
questions: • Why is it necessary to solve the problem?
• What is the unknown? How much of the unknown can you determine?
• What is it you don’t yet understand?
• What is the information you have? Is the information suf cient? Or is it insuf cient? Or
redundant? Or contradictory? • Can you derive something useful from the information you have?
Have you used al the information?
• Can you draw a diagram of the problem? A gure?
• What are the boundaries of the problem?
• What are the boundaries of the problem?
• Can you separate the various parts of the problem?
Can you write them down? What are the relationships of the parts of the problem?
• Have you seen this problem before? Have you seen this problem in a slightly different form?
Do you know a related problem? • Suppose you nd a problem related to yours that has
already been solved. Can you use that solution? Can you use its method? • What are the best,
worst, and most probable scenarios you can imagine?
Think Like a Child
Noam Chomsky of MIT, whose theory of the “deep structure” of language created modern
linguistics, believes his insights come from the wil ingness to ask obvious questions, as children
notoriously do.

Knowing How To See T -

Get in touch with the child

inside you. Close your eyes and imagine yourself when you were at your most inquisitive age.
Suppose you imagine yourself at twelve years of age. Reconstruct the details of that age as much
as possible. Experience again the Christmases, Fourths of July, birthdays, vacations, friends,
teachers, and the school days that you experienced. Deepen the experiences as much as you can.
Remember “being in school” instead of “remembering being in school.” Remember “being with
your best friend” instead of “remembering being with your best friend.”
Now look at your problem as a twelve-year-old would look at it. What questions would a twelveyear-old ask?

fi

fi

fi

fi

Playful Questions

Knowing How To See T -

Ask playful questions to put

yourself or a brainstorming group into a childlike, playful y aware state:
• Try seeing and thinking about your problem as a living creature. What would it look like? Draw
a picture of it. For example, the problem of sel ing more houses might appear as a helpless,
strange-looking creature.
• Think of the past and future reincarnations of your problem. What would they be?
• See your problem as edible. What would it taste like?
• Can you imagine the past and likely future of your problem?
• Look at the problem as the top of something and imagine what the underground portion looks
like. Can you describe it? • View the world from the perspective of the problem. What do you
look like to the problem?
• Search the problem for something that is beautiful or aesthetical y interesting. Can you nd
something?
• Imagine the personal life of the problem. What are its politics? Its religion? What would its
love life be like? Where was the problem born? Does it have siblings? If so, are they friendly
with each other? What is the problem afraid of?
• If you were the problem’s psychotherapist, what would the problem con de to you?

Knowing How To See T -

Color Questions

Trigger your spirit of inquiry by using “color” questioning, a particular application of the work
of Jerry Rhodes, who did extensive research with managers at Phil ips. At the core of this
technique are types of questions that one might ask. The questions are identi ed with colors as
fol ows: Green: Think of the color green as fertile and creative. Green is the color of imagination
and ingenuity. Ask, “What if?” or “Suppose we?”
Yellow: Think of the color yel ow as neutral and objective. Yel ow is the color for description of
fact. Ask, “What is?”
Blue: Think of the color blue as hopeful and positive. Blue is the color for judgments and
opinions of value and need. Ask, “What can we do?” or “What should
we do?”
Red: Think of the color red as negative. Red is the color of limitations and constraints. Ask,
“What can’t be done?” or “What‘s not possible?”

fi

fi

fi

Many of us have a tendency to favor one or two of these types of questions, and some of us do so
in such disproportion that we are unable to entertain questions outside of our predilections.
Sometimes we’l get so hung up on a particular line of questioning that we’re prevented from
moving forward.

Color questioning prompts you to think of questions from each of the core categories. Label four
separate sheets of paper: “green,” “yel ow,”
“blue,” and “red.” Think of as many “green,” “yel ow,” and “blue” questions as you can and
write them on the appropriate sheets. Whenever you have a negative question, write it on the
sheet labeled “red.” At a later stage, review the red questions, and try to look for ways to
overcome them. You can post your questions in columns on a large sheet of paper. You can also
write them on index cards and tape them to the wal under the appropriately colored card, or you
can use colored markers and ip charts. After listing as many questions as you can for each color,
prioritize the questions decide which questions you should address rst.
If you’re working with a group, simply have the participants brainstorm as many questions as
they can about a speci c topic. Afterward, organize the questions according to colors and post
them on ip charts. Prompt the group to extend each category by asking questions, such as
“What green questions might unlock our imaginations?” “Do we need more blue questions?” and
“Have we exhausted the possible yel ow question possibilities?” After the group has listed as
many questions as they can for each category, have the group prioritize the questions and then
decide which are the most important to address rst.
STRATEGY TWO:
MAKING YOUR THOUGHT VISIBLE
The explosion of creativity in the Renaissance was intimately tied to the recording and
conveying of a vast body of knowledge in a paral el language: a language of drawings, diagrams,
and graphs—as, for instance, in the renowned diagrams and sketches of Galileo. Galileo
revolutionized science by making his thought visible with diagrams and drawings, while his
contemporaries used conventional verbal and algebraic approaches. His diagrams of celestial
bodies unfolded a deeply visual logic that produced insights far beyond those achieved by his
peers and changed the history of science.
Leonardo da Vinci also used drawings, diagrams, and graphs as a way to capture information, a
way to formulate problems, and the means of solving problems. In Leonardo’s notebooks, the
diagrams and drawings are the focal points, not the words. That is, his pictures were not intended
simply as “il ustrations” of his notes; rather, the notes were intended as comments on the
pictures. Language took such a secondary role for Leonardo da Vinci that he viewed it as a way
to name or describe discoveries, not to make them.

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fl

Language predisposes our mind to a certain way of thinking. It’s as if the language we use draws
a magic circle around us, a circle from which there is no escape save by stepping out of the circle
(language) into another. Consider the dif culties of physicists, such as Ernest Rutherford, in the
early days of atomic physics. The word “atom” meant “indivisible” in Greek. The notion that the
atom was indivisible was a xed one, and it was only when physicists stepped out of their verbalmathematical language circle of thinking and into the visual circle of thinking were they able to
demonstrate graphical y that the atom was a divisible unit of matter.

Diagram Your Thinking
The notebooks of Einstein, Martha Graham, da Vinci, Edison, and Darwin suggest that one of the
primary reasons they achieved greatness was their ability to represent their subjects visual y by
diagramming and mapping.
Darwin’s diagrams were pivotal factors in the thinking process that led to his theory of evolution.
He used them to work through many points: as a way of classifying the relation of different
species to each other, as a way to represent the accident of life, the irregularity of nature, the
explosiveness of growth, and of the necessity to keep the number of species constant. Within
fteen months after drawing his rst tree diagram, Darwin had solved the major problems of his
theory of evolution.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

Try looking at your problem diagrammatical y, as wel as

verbal y. First, write your problem statement as completely as you can. Then diagram it by
printing the problem in the center of a piece of paper and drawing a box around it. Ask yourself,
“What are the main features and characteristics of the problem?” Print al potential answers above
straight lines that emanate from the box. The fol owing is a simple diagram on improving an
organization’s productivity. The main features branch out from the problem.
You can extend your thinking by mapping the answers to the question. In other words, if X is the
answer to the rst question—“What are the main features and characteristics of the problem?”—
then you can ask, “What are the main features and characteristics of X?” (What are the main
features and characteristics of people, capital, technology, and so on?) By drawing circles around
related answers and linking them up in a contrasting color, you start to give texture to your
understanding of the problem. Arranging information in this way invites you to look for
relationships and connections among the answers. When you nish, ask,
• Did the diagram add to my understanding of the problem? • Did I nd out anything about the
approach of the problem? • What’s missing?
• What areas are foggy?
• What am I now seeing?
• What should I be thinking about?

fi

fi

fi

fi

Everyone who thinks at al has noticed that language is practical y useless for describing anything
that goes on in the brain. Pure thinking is a dynamic, shifting, active thing. It is condensed and
telegrammatic, and only when it is expanded in form and made communicable to others does it
lose its active, volatile, and creative character. A way to capture your thought before it loses its
active nature is to mind map it.

fi

fi

What Feynman did was look at al the col ected information, rearrange it into diagrams, and nd
the idea that had been lying dormant. His diagrams made it possible for physicists to look at a
world that was previously unimaginable.

Mind Mapping
Mind mapping was formalized as a technique in the early 1970s by Tony Buzan, a British brain
researcher, as a whole-brain alternative to linear thinking.
Mind mapping makes it easier to access the tremendous potential of your brain by representing
your thoughts using key words. It’s an organized brainstorming method to nd out what you
know by writing a central theme and then depicting thoughts and associations as vines growing
in al directions from the central theme.
Mind mapping does not select information by categories, but sees whatever is in the mind. In the
il ustration below, I start with the word “yel ow”
as the central theme and then print the rst thoughts that come to mind. My rst thoughts are
“bus,” “green,” “orange,” “daffodil,” and “banana.” A quick spray of associations comes from
each thought as “bus” leads to “truck” to “ambulance” to “ re engine” to “ re” to “ambulance”
to “hospital”
and “green.” Other thoughts lead to fruits and owers and school. The associations are potential
y in nite as each association triggers new ones.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

A mind map reaches out in al directions and catches thoughts from any angle. Once the human
brain realizes that it can associate anything with anything else, it wil instantaneously nd
associations. After you map your thoughts, you can then look for unifying patterns and

connections that might link seemingly different thoughts or themes into a new idea or creative
solution to a problem.
A major characteristic of creative geniuses is the tendency to extend their associative horizon
widely and unusual y. The rest of us tend to constrain our associative horizons, in the spirit of
linear and explanatory thinking, and to minimize imaginative connections, which are seen as
carelessness and lack of discipline. Yet associations and imaginative connections are essential
elements of creativity; they distinguish ideas that are truly original and innovative from those
that are logical but inconsequential.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T Here are the guidelines:

1. Theme. Print a word or short phrase that describes the essence of your subject on a large sheet
of paper (the bigger, the better). Draw a circle around it. If you prefer, draw a picture that
represents your subject. A picture wil enhance your ability to think creatively.
2. Key words and prompts. Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s fel ow poet Arthur Henry Hal am observed
that Tennyson’s genius was the ability to col ect fragments of thought and use them as themes
from which his writing would spring. Tennyson would explore a theme, usual y a word or short
phrase that had popped into his mind, and let it trigger associated ideas and images. This process
al owed a stream of ideas to gush forth where only a trickle previously had been found.
Key words enable us to draw out related ideas through the process of association. It’s possible to
draw out complex patterns of association from a few key words. For example, from a drop of
water one might associate out into the gushing Niagara or the vast Atlantic. Write down as
quickly as you can thoughts associated with the center word. Use key words. Ignore al irrelevant
words and phrases and concentrate only on expressing the essentials and what these
“associations” excite in your mind.
3. Print your key words. Printing makes more of a visual image in your mind and is easier to
remember than handwriting. Express your thoughts with a minimum number of key words. You
want to minimize clutter and al ow yourself the freedom to make creative associations.
4. Put down everything that comes to mind. Fil out the page as quickly as you can by printing al
spontaneous associations even if they seem ridiculous or irrelevant. If you get stuck, pick out any
thought on the map and print the rst association you make from that thought.
5. Connect. Connect the key words with lines radiating from the center. By linking words, you
show clearly how one thought relates to another and you wil begin to see relationships that wil
help you gather and organize your ideas into clusters. Add additional words if necessary.

fi

Our brains are wired to see order and we invent elaborate architectures to do so. Psychologists
have found that if you put people in a room with a contraption of lightbulbs wired to blink on

and off at random, they wil quickly discern what they believe are patterns, theories for predicting
which bulb wil be next to blink. Once a person becomes immersed in thinking about a subject, he
or she wil nd it dif cult not to see patterns and make connections.
6. Use graphics. Colors, pictures, and symbols can be used to highlight important thoughts and to
show relationships between different areas on the map. You might color code the main points:
red for most important, green for secondary points, and so on. Or you could use asterisks,
numbers, letters, or geometric symbols as tools to help organize your thoughts. Pictures and
abstract symbols can be used to stimulate your creativity by triggering your right brain.
7. Cluster. Organize the major clusters into themes. A mind map is a creation on paper that comes
close to the way your mind clusters concepts in your brain. Because of this, the brain more
readily accepts the information contained on a map. It can be pictured in the mind’s eye. Once
your ideas are clustered, you can move from the viewpoint of the creator to the viewpoint of the
critic who is seeing the ideas for the rst time. As a critic, you can test your associations, missing
information, and areas where you need more and better ideas. Mind mapping is an idea
generator. It is not the supplier of raw material, so your map may show areas where you need to
col ect more information.
8. Revise. Darwin’s rst tree diagram was primitive and fragmentary. As he progressed in his
work, his diagrams become more elaborate and detailed. Similarly, Vincent van Gogh’s artistic
genius fol owed a similar process of revision. He would move from his original vision to
completed expression by the fol owing stages. He would start with a conceptualization for a
subject and paint it in one session, perhaps in three or four hours. Then he would create a whole
series of paintings for the subject, trying to get closer and closer to his vision, until he was
satis ed.
In the same way, by continual y revising, re ning, and elaborating your mind map, you keep
your thinking active and get closer and closer to the ultimate answer. Readily revise your mind
map by adding new thoughts or eliminating elements that seem extraneous.
Mind mapping al ows you to group and regroup concepts, encouraging comparisons. Moving
and synthesizing concepts into new clusters often provokes new ideas. How would you describe
the gure below?

They are twelve separate and unrelated dots. However, because of the way they are clustered, we
perceive them as separate groups of dots. In fact, it is almost impossible to see them any other
way. By organizing the dots into clusters, one gives them a new identity. This is what happens
when you graphical y map your thinking. When you organize your thoughts into clusters, you
give them a new identity and the process of idea evolution can real y begin.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

In the dot il ustration, you can also choose to focus on one speci c dot or one group of dots or on
three separate groups of dots. Similarly, when you map your subject, you can emphasize either

individual thoughts, a cluster of thoughts, or the subject as a whole. Mind mapping provides an
easy way to move from the general to the speci c and from the speci c to the general. In
addition, mind mapping
• Clears your mind of mental clutter
• Focuses you on the subject
• Activates your whole brain
• Al ows you to develop a detailed organization of your subject
• Demonstrates connections between isolated pieces of information • Gives you a clear picture of
both the details and the big picture

fi

fi

• Gives you a graphic representation of what you know about the subject, al owing you to easily
identify gaps in your information
• Requires you to concentrate on your subject, which helps get information about it transferred
from short-term to long-term memory

Group Mind Maps

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

In a group, individuals combine their energies to create a

group mind map as “hard copy” for the group’s brainstorming session. First, have each
participant create a mind map about the subject. Having completed the individual maps, create a
group map. Use wal -sized sheets of paper to record the basic structure. Cover an entire wal with
paper. The drawing of the map can be done by one good mind mapper or by the whole group.
Color and codes should be agreed on in advance to ensure consistency and clarity. Al ideas are
total y accepted and are incorporated into the map.
Variations

fi

Once you understand the basic principles of mind mapping, try different variations until you nd
the method that works best for you. Fol owing are some suggestions.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

Moving mind maps. An interesting way to cluster your

thoughts after mind mapping is to copy your key words from your map on index cards, group
them into stacks of associated thoughts, and then tape them to a wal . This creates a moving mind
map on a wal . The basic guidelines are 1. Print the key words from your mind map on index
cards, one key word per card.
2. Write the central theme of the problem on a different-colored card and tape it to the wal or
chalkboard.
3. Tape al the other cards to the wal or chalkboard, around the central theme card. Cluster related
thoughts together. The act of transferring your thoughts onto cards makes it easier for you to
group and regroup your thoughts, which facilitates comparisons. Moving your cards around into
new juxtapositions often wil provoke new ideas.
4. Once your cards are taped to the wal in clusters, you can test your associations, discover
what’s missing, and discover areas where you need more and better ideas.
5. Add cards as new thoughts and relationships occur to you.
6. If you taped the cards to a chalkboard or a large sheet of paper, you can connect related
thoughts with colored arrows. On a wal , you can use stickpins and string to connect related
areas.
It often helps to involve yourself completely in a subject, in much the same way you might
become total y absorbed in a movie or novel, before you mind map it. The Spanish artist Pablo
Picasso would total y immerse himself in his subject before he painted it.
Picasso’s technique
The artist, Picasso observed, paints to unload feelings, visions, and thoughts. This, he believed,
was the whole secret of art. When Picasso went for a walk in the forest, he thought about nothing
but the color green until he got “green indigestion.” To get rid of this “ful ” sensation, he
unloaded it into a picture. Picasso’s copious work was a product of this continual re l ing and
emptying of his mind on canvas.

fi

fi

fi

fl

After Picasso was “ l ed” with his subject, he would start a work of art from some arbitrary
point, proceeding in a desultory manner, and somehow end up with something novel and
original. One representation of this method is found in the movie The Mystery of Picasso. He
begins with a ower, transforms it into a sh, then into a chicken—switching back and forth
from black and white to color—which he then refashions into a cat surrounded on the side by
human beings. As Picasso painted, his topic changed as his thoughts changed. The true painting,
he seems to indicate, can only occur after a process uncovers what is there.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

To try Picasso’s technique, col ect as much material as you

can about your problem in an easily readable form—for example, summaries of related articles
and books, the experiences of others, ideas that people have given you, and competitors’ actions.
Read through al the material as rapidly as you can in one sitting until you are “ l ed” with your
subject. Then, like Picasso did with his art, start from some arbitrary theme and mind map it,
letting the thoughts ow while you are in this “activated” state. Refashion your map as your
thoughts and topics change, just as Picasso transformed objects and switched back and forth
between topics as he painted.
Final y, ask yourself what your mind map means. What have you uncovered that you didn’t
know was there? Do you notice any patterns? If so, what do they suggest? What solutions pop
into your head? If you al ow al the information to evolve natural y, new ideas wil develop.
Thought cards. Pure thinking is generative and can be characterized by rapid bursts of ideas
embedded in the sustained thought of the thinker. Picasso’s technique activates generative
thinking with mind maps. Another way to activate a rapid ow of ideas is to use index cards.
First, col ect and read material as described in “Picasso’s technique.” After you have read
through al the material as rapidly as you can and
“ l ed” yourself, write your thoughts on index cards as quickly as you can. Write one thought per
card, using key words or phrases. Write anything that comes to mind as quickly as you can. Keep
writing until your thoughts stop. Then, arrange the cards in stacks of associated thoughts. Go
through them again and add new cards as new thoughts occur to you.
Write the subject or problem on a card and tape it to the wal or chalkboard. Tape al the other
cards to the wal around the subject cards. Cluster related thoughts together. Once your cards are
taped to the wal , look for associations, connections, gaps, and areas where you need more
information. Keep grouping and regrouping your cards into new juxtapositions until you get the
inspiration you need.
Picasso’s technique begins by l ing yourself with information from a variety of sources about
the subject and then mind mapping associations.
Eventual y, thoughts are clustered and organized into common components or themes. The
themes evolve from the map. An alternative is to rst determine your subject’s basic themes or
components and then map each separate theme.
Theme Mapping

fi

fl

fi

fi

fl

fi

The original method of mind mapping is simply to map lots of thoughts and then weed out the
ones that are nonsensical or unrealistic by revising the map several times. The major themes and
ideas evolve over time in mind mapping.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

In theme mapping, the goal is to map more realistic and

theme-related thoughts and ideas from the outset by establishing a structure of connected themes
in advance. Here are the guidelines:
1. Subject. Print or draw your subject or problem in the center of a large sheet of paper.
2. Themes. List the signi cant themes, components, or dimensions of your subject. The optimal
number of themes for a manageable map is between six and eight. If you have more than eight,
make additional maps. Ask questions: What are my speci c objectives? What are the constants in
my problem? If my subject were a book, what would the chapter headings be? What are the
dimensions of my problem? For example, suppose you wanted to improve brainstorming. If
brainstorming were a book, what would the chapter headings be?
3.Branches. Print the signi cant themes around the subject and connect them to the subject with
straight lines. For example, if your subject is “Improving Brainstorming Sessions,” your themes
might be “People,” “Environment,” “Resources,” “Facilitator,” and “Rules.” In the example to
fol ow, the themes are connected to the subject as branches.
4. Mind map. Now extend your thinking by mind mapping (see mind-map guidelines) each
theme as a separate branch. Free associate and make associations. For example, the theme
“Rules” leads to the key thoughts of “Defer judgment,” “Quantity,” “Quota,” “Freewheel,”

fi

fi

fi

fi

“Hitchhiking on other ideas,” “Combine ideas,” and so on.
The idea is to extend each theme as far as you can. When you’ve nished mapping each separate
theme, look for links and connections between the separate themes. Explore each theme for
possible new interpretations and ideas.

Lotus Blossom
start with a theme, subdivide it into subthemes, and then to make variations on each of the
subthemes. Yasuo Matsumura of Clover Management Research in Chiba City, Japan, developed
Lotus Blossom

Eliot’s strategy. You start with a central theme and expand into subthemes and ideas until you’ve
created several different subthemes, each with separate entry points. In Lotus Blossom, the petals
around the core of the blossom are guratively “peeled back” one at a time, revealing a key
component or subtheme. This approach is pursued in ever-widening circles until the problem or
opportunity is comprehensively explored. The cluster of themes and subthemes that are
developed in one way or another provide several different possibilities.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T The guidelines are:

1. Write the central theme in the center of the diagram.
2. Write ideas or applications in the surrounding circles labeled A to H surrounding the central
theme.
3. Use the ideas written in the circles as the central themes for the surrounding lotus blossom
petals or boxes. Thus, the idea or application you wrote in circle A
would become the central theme for the lower-middle box A. It now becomes the basis for
generating eight new ideas or applications.
4. Continue the process until the lotus blossom diagram is completed.

fi

Ex: If you complete the entire diagram, you’l have sixty-four new ideas or ways to increase
productivity or decrease expenses.

Another dynamic thinking strategy is systemic thinking. Reality is made up of curves, but we’re
biased to see a straight-line, cause-effect view of the world. Geniuses tend to operate more in
terms of “loops of interaction” or “mutual interaction” than linear or mechanical cause and
effect. This thinking strategy typical y al ows them to track whole systems of interacting
elements.
Freud and Einstein both believed that unless you looked at the whole system and al of its
components you may miss the key relationships and how they interact.
System Mapping
Consider nature’s creations. Nature doesn’t just make leaves; it makes branches and trees and
roots to go with them. It makes whole systems of interacting elements. Similarly, Edison didn’t

just invent an electric lightbulb—other people had invented electri ed lamps. He invented a
whole practical system for electric lighting, including dynamos, conduits, and a means for
dividing up current that could il uminate a large number of bulbs.
System mapping wil shift us from focusing on the parts to seeing the whole, and from reacting to
static “snapshots” of the problem to creating new possible futures by seeing new relationships
and connections between the different components.
A strategy to think systematical y is system mapping. System mapping wil shift us from focusing
on the parts to seeing the whole, and from reacting to static “snapshots” of the problem to
creating new possible futures by seeing new relationships and connections between the different
components.
When you have a good sense, a good map, of how al the different components interact, you’l
begin to see the deeper dynamics of the problem and wil begin to look at it in a different way.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

Fol owing are guidelines on how to make a system map: 1.

Write a single word or short phrase that identi es your subject. Place it in the middle of the page
and circle it. Your subject can be anything: declining sales, training and development, marketing,
future markets, corporate reorganization, and so on.
Example: An insurance agency that customizes and brokers insurance packages between
insurance providers and corporations is interested in looking for ways to improve business
possibilities. Their subject is “Improving Business.”
2. Identify major components. These are the major areas of the domain that need to be
considered. There are usual y three to six major areas (for example, company, competition,
environment, customer) that need to be considered. According to Buckminster Ful er, three
elements are the minimum number of elements necessary to have a structure or pattern. Even
when the number of variables is smal , if the elements al mutual y in uence and relate to one
another, quite sophisticated interactions can be stimulated. Freud’s ability to handle a great deal
of complexity with his simple model of the ego, id, and superego; Walt Disney’s ability to play
the role of the Dreamer, Realist, and Critic when creating ideas; and Einstein’s famous E=MC2
exemplify dynamic models based on three interrelated elements.
Draw your major components as outlying circles and link them back to the central subject.
Example: The major components for the insurance agency are “Our Company,” “Insurance
Providers,” the “Corporate Customer,” and the “Environment.”

fl

fi

fl

fi

fl

fl

3. Identify the in uences on each component. Every in uence, whether positive or negative, is
both cause and effect. Nothing is ever in uenced in just one direction. Geniuses focus more on
“relationships” between objects than on the objects themselves. In his theory of gravitational
attraction, Isaac Newton pointed out there is not one operation by which the sun attracts Jupiter

and another by which Jupiter attracts the sun, but one operation by which the sun and Jupiter
endeavor to approach each other.
The idea is to identify and link as many in uences as possible to each component. Some
examples of common in uencers are
A. Things that in uence a company: product design, suppliers, workforce, management,
materials, methods, machinery, nancial performance, distribution channels, marketing, sales
personnel
B. Things that in uence a customer: competition, economy, needs, goals
C. Things that in uence the environment: economy, technology, demographics
D. In our example, the in uencers of our insurance company are technologies, cost-cutting
procedures, competition, management, operations, and services.
The key to seeing reality is seeing circles of in uence rather than straight lines. By linking
in uences to the major components, we break out of the reactive mindset that comes inevitably
from linear thinking. Every circle tel s a story. By mapping the ow of in uence, you can see
major patterns and trends.
4. Identify and link important factors for each in uence. This step prompts a questioning process
that often reveals trends and new developments. What has an impact on the in uence? What’s
happening now? What are the recent trends and developments? What are the recent changes that
are affecting the in uence? List as many as possible and link to each in uence.
Example: In our example, the important factors for the in uence “Technologies” on the
“Customers” component are “Fax,” “Networks,” “Database,” “Internet,” “Teleconference,” and
“EDI.”
5. Prioritize in uences and factors. Decide which in uences and which factors or changes are
having the biggest impact on the mess, or which in uences are capable of having the biggest
in uence. Use color pens to color code the in uences: Red—major; Green—moderate, Yel ow—
none. In our example the major in uences are “Downsizing,” “Cost-Cutting,” and
“Technologies.”

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fi

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

6. Analyze the major impact items. Are the factors positive or negative? Why did the changes
happen? Do they re ect a trend or a short-term event? What are al the possible causes of the
change? Color code each item as to its impact. In our example, the agency realizes that the
advances in technology wil give the insurance providers and corporations the means to eliminate
the middleman, the agency. Soon, the corporations wil use their own computer power to scan a
comprehensive database and select and customize an optimal insurance package for themselves,
in the process cutting out the insurance agency.

If the insurance agency had used traditional brainstorming, listing linear cause-effect chains, they
may not have seen the interrelationships between technology and cost-cutting that dominate their
domain
7. Brainstorm. Select an impact item factor and generate as many ideas, possibilities, or solutions
as possible. In our example, the agency realizes that the changes in technology and corporate
interest in cost-cutting is a long-term trend that wil not be in uenced by any changes in their
services. They decide to brainstorm for ways to rede ne their services to include fast, customized
solutions to clients’ emerging business problems, new kinds of value-added information, new
specialized niche services, and ways to signi cantly improve personalized customer service in
everything they do.
System mapping has several bene ts:
The map tel s a story.
The main skil is to see the “story” that the map tel s: how the components of the subject
interrelate, how patterns of change are emerging, and how those patterns might be in uenced.
Einstein did no experiments, gathered no new information, and invented nothing new before he
created the theory of relativity. What Einstein did was to tel a “new” story about how space,
time, and energy interrelated and how those concepts in uence and are in uenced.
The map helps us to see and keep “the big picture.”
The map helps us to see the relationships and connections between major factors, rather than
linear cause-effect chains.
The map helps us to identify processes of change rather than a series of unrelated static
snapshots. Leonardo da Vinci’s genius was the ability to see the “processes of the results” rather
than the “results of the process.”
The system map al ows us to see the details.
Diagramming Extreme Conditions
System mapping consists of two processing stages: a generative phase, in which the subject is
mapped, fol owed by an exploratory phase, in which the map is explored for possible
interpretations and ideas. Once the dynamics of a subject are represented, insight is gained and
ideas begin to ow. Another way to visual y represent the dynamics of your subject or situation is
to diagram its extreme conditions.

fl

fl

fl

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

Leonardo da Vinci observed that to real y understand a subject, you should examine it under
extreme conditions. He would rst identify the signi cant factors of his subject, either through
observation or imagination, and then explore the interaction of these factors under various
conditions—especial y extreme ones. For example, to understand human anatomy, da Vinci
investigated a variety of questions: When a person puts on weight, what organs put on weight

Force Field Analysis
Force eld analysis is a powerful technique that was developed by Kurt Lewin, a social
psychologist, to visual y identify how positive and negative forces dynamical y in uence
subjects or situations by pushing them to one extreme or the other.
• Better de ne what your chal enge is
• Make a careful assessment of al relevant factors
• Identify strengths you can maximize
• Identify weaknesses you can minimize
• Add more strengths

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T To make a force eld diagram:

1. Write the chal enge you are trying to solve.
2. Determine the extremes. On the left side of the sheet, describe the worst-case scenario. On the
same line, at the right, describe the best-case scenario.
3. In the center, list al the signi cant factors or conditions of the subject or situation. It is helpful
to list as many signi cant factors as you can when constructing the diagram.
4. As you list the conditions, you wil nd some of the forces pushing you to the best case while
other forces are pul ing you toward catastrophe. Draw a line that re ects whether you are being
pushed or pul ed by that factor and place an X where you feel you are at present.

fl

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

5. Final y, examine al the X s and place an X on the general continuum that extends from the
“Best-Case Scenario” to the “Worst-Case Scenario.” This gives you a snapshot of where you are
at this time.

fi

fi

rst? When the body is starved, what is the last organ to shrink? When you push your subject to
its extremes, you’l quickly see its essential parts, crucial relationships, and driving principles.

1. Minimize or eliminate your negatives. 2. Maximize your positives.
3. Add more positive forces.
In the example, one could choose to develop ways to minimize the negatives by working on
them. For example, she might increase her idea production by giving herself a daily idea quota,
al ocate one hour each day for creative thinking, read books on creative thinking to learn the
techniques, start practicing creative-thinking habits, such as learning how to take risks, or
become more persistent by refusing to give up on an idea until she makes it work.
Let’s consider the probability of getting a major sale. The rst thing we do is construct a force
eld analysis with the best-case scenario of closing the sale and the worst-case scenario of losing

fi

fi

There are three options for moving the X toward the best- case scenario:

the sale. Then the factors are listed and diagrammed as fol ows.

Visual Brainstorming
Creative geniuses use a great diversity of graphic means in shaping and communicating their
thoughts. Some use diagrams or maps. Others build three-dimensional, physical models.
And stil others, like Martha Graham, use simple, fragmentary schematic drawings and sketches.

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

Visual brainstorming is an attempt to use drawings and

sketches to conceptualize and capture ideas. The basic idea is to draw a sketch of how the
problem might be solved. The sketches may be abstract, symbolic, or realistic. Draw the solution
to your problem. Then review and revise it by modifying it or by making a new sketch or
drawing. Keep modifying or making new sketches as long as you can. Final y, construct a nal
solution from one of the sketches or from parts of different sketches.

fi

In the il ustration below, I’ve visual y arranged the letter T, the number eight, and the letter P into
a visual synthesis. Most people easily interpret this as a mal et striking bal s through a hoop in a
game of croquet. The dynamics of the drawing immediately suggest a particular interpretation.

If I had asked you to synthesize the T, eight, and P into a game of croquet, you would have found
it dif cult, if not impossible, to do so without drawing or sketching various possibilities. In fact,
if you read a detailed description of how you can combine a T, eight, and P to represent a game
of croquet, you would stil nd it impossible to understand without visualizing and drawing it.

Groups

MAKING YOUR THOUGHT
VISIBLE T -

Participants are al owed ve minutes to draw sketches of a

problem solution. The sketches may be abstract, symbolic, or realistic. No talking is permitted.
After ve minutes, the participants pass their sketches to the person on their right. They review
the sketch they receive, add features, modify the drawing, or make a new sketch on the same
page. They then pass this drawing to the person on their right. This process of modifying and
passing the modi ed sketches continues for about thirty minutes. Final y, the participants col ect
and examine al the drawings and select a nal solution or construct a nal solution from parts of
different sketches.

PART II
THINKING WHAT
NO ONE ELSE IS THINKING
Creative genius operates similarly to Darwin’s theory of biological evolution. According to
Darwin, nature creates many possibilities through blind
“trial and error” and then lets the process of natural selection decide which species survive.
The rst strategy, “Thinking Fluently,” in Part I presents how geniuses produce prodigious
quantities of ideas.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

An important aspect of this theory is that, as in evolution, you need some means of producing
variation in your ideas, and for this variation to be truly effective, it must be blind. To count as

blind, the variations are shaped by chance or unrelated factors. In nature, a gene pool total y
lacking in variation would be unable to adapt to changing circumstances, with consequences that
would be fatal to the species’ survival. In time, the genetical y encoded wisdom would convert to
foolishness. A comparable process operates within us. Every individual has the ability to create
ideas based on his or her existing patterns of thinking, on the way he or she was taught to think.
But without any provision for variations, ideas eventual y stagnate and lose their adaptive
advantages.

Cutting a cake into 4 slices with only 3 cuts
Most people have trouble coming up with one solution because of their past experiences cutting
cakes. To solve this, you need to change the way you think about cakes, a piece of cake and how
to cut a cake. One solution is to cut the cake in half and stack the one half on top of the other. Cut
this piece in half, stack the pieces on top of one another and cut them. Or cut the cake into
quarters and then slice the cake horizontal y through the quarters. Or cut the cake as il ustrated
below.

When you break out of your established patterns and ignore the conventional wisdom, you’l
discover that there are many solutions.
They deliberately change the way they think by provoking different thinking patterns that
incorporate chance and unrelated factors into their thinking. These different thinking patterns
enable them to look at the same information as everyone else and see something different.
The strategies in Part I enabled creative geniuses to produce a rich variety of original ideas and
creative solutions to problems by provoking different thinking patterns. They include several
strategies:
• Combining things in novel ways in “Making Novel Combinations”
• Using random stimuli in “Connecting the Unconnected”
• Thinking in opposites in “Looking at the Other Side”
• Thinking metaphorical y and analogical y in “Looking in Other Worlds”
• Actively seeking the accidental discovery in “Finding What You’re Not Looking For”A
shows a conventional thinking pattern, which shows thought moving linearly from a problem
to a solution. This is how we’ve been taught to think. When confronted with a problem, we
analytical y select the most promising approach based on past experiences in life, education,

and work, exclude al other approaches, and work within a clearly de ned direction toward a
conventional solution.

•
Il ustration B shows how a genius wil break up this conventional thinking pattern by introducing
random stimuli. This action provokes new thinking patterns that lead to the formation of new
ideas and concepts that you cannot get using the conventional way of thinking.

STRATEGY THREE:
THINKING FLUENTLY

fi

A distinguishing characteristic of genius is immense productivity. All geniuses produce. Bach
wrote a cantata every week, even when he was sick or exhausted. Mozart produced more than six
hundred pieces of music. Einstein is best known for his paper on relativity, but he published 248
other papers. Darwin is known for his theory of evolution, but he wrote 119 other publications in
his lifetime. Freud published 330 papers and Maslow 165. Rembrandt produced around 650
paintings and 2,000 drawings and Picasso executed more than 20,000 works. Shakespeare wrote
154

The common misconception that phenomenal creative geniuses contribute only a few selective
masterworks is plain wrong.
homas Edison may be best known for his incandescent lightbulb and phonograph, but he held
1,093 patents, stil the record. Edison looked at creativity as simply good, honest hard work.
“Genius,” he once said, “is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.”It took him nine
thousand experiments to perfect the lightbulb and fty thousand to invent the storage-cel battery.
Once, when an assistant asked why he continued to persist trying to discover a long-lasting
lament for the lightbulb after thousands of failures, Edison explained he didn’t understand the
question. In his mind, he hadn’t failed once. Instead, he discovered thousands of things that
didn’t work.
True-North Thinking
Geniuses produce because they think uently. Fluency of thought means generating quantities of
ideas. To think uently, it’s necessary to organize your thinking around a set number of
principles, which I cal “True-North Thinking.”
The True-North principles for creative thinking are
• Defer judgment while generating ideas.
• Generate as many ideas as possible.
• Record ideas as they occur.
• Elaborate or improve upon the ideas.
Defer Judgment
When looking for ideas, either alone or with a group, it is essential not to judge, evaluate, or
criticize ideas as they are generated. Nothing kil s creativity more quickly or more absolutely
than critical, judgmental thinking.Only humans can try to come up with new ideas while
simultaneously coming up with al the reasons why the ideas won’t work.
Consequently, whenever we brainstorm for ideas, we spend most of our time imagining al the
reasons why an idea can’t work or can’t be done, instead of generating as many ideas as we can.
Judging, it seems, is safer than attempting to generate something new, and people often
concentrate on judging ideas, to the exclusion of generating them. Dif culties arise when people
judge ideas too early and reject them before al their implications are considered.

fi

fi

fl

Below is a diagram of a person evaluating ideas as they are offered. The person thinks of idea A
and rejects it as unsound. Then the person thinks of ideas B and C and rejects both out of hand.
Eventual y, the person moves toward idea D, which is a safe, conservative idea that compares

fl

fi

sonnets. Some were masterpieces, while others were no better than his contemporaries could
have written, and some were simply bad. In fact, more bad poems were composed by the major
poets than the minor poets. They composed more bad poems than minor poets simply because
they produced more poetry.

favorably with the person’s past experiences and carries no risk. Once an idea is judged, creative
thought crystal izes and stops. Few new ideas are generated, and eventual y, thoughts are
channeled to weak, safe, conservative ideas.
The next diagram represents the thought process of a person who does not evaluate ideas as they
are offered. Here, the person is able to think uidly and freely, freewheel, hitchhike, piggyback,
and combine ideas to create even more ideas, until the breakthrough “eureka” idea is achieved.

Possibility thinking

fl

The secret to deferring judgment while generating a lot of ideas is to separate your thinking into
two stages: possibility thinking and practicality thinking. Possibility thinking is the raw
generation of ideas, without judgment or evaluation of any kind. You turn off your internal critic.
Your internal critic is that part of your mind that is constantly tel ing you why something can’t

work or can’t be done. The strategy is to generate as many ideas, both obvious and novel, as
possible, without criticism of any kind.
After you’ve created the maximum number of ideas possible, you change your strategy to
practicality thinking, the evaluation and judgment of ideas, to nd the ideas that have the most
value to you. Edison once declared that he constructed three thousand different theories in
connection with electric lighting, each one of them reasonable, before he decided on the one
theory that was the most practical and pro table. His rst goal was to construct as many
possibilities as he could, and then he turned to the business of evaluation to nd the one that was
the most practical and pro table. Possibility thinking and practicality thinking are two separate
mental operations, without a compromise, in-between position.

Quantity
Edison’s New Jersey laboratory contains a staggering display of hundreds of phonograph horns
of every shape, size, and material. Some were round, square, angular, thin, short, squat while
others are curved and as long as six feet. This col ection of rejected ideas is a visual testament to
Edison’s thinking strategy—in essence to explore every conceivable possibility. For every bril
iant idea Edison had he had many duds like the horse-drawn contraption that would col ect
snowand ice in the winter and compress it into blocks that families could use in the summer as a
refrigerant.
Quantity breeds quality
Imagine a pearl diver on an island in the South Seas. He pushes his canoe off from shore, paddles
out into the lagoon, dives deep into the water, picks an oyster off the bottom, surfaces, climbs
into his boat, paddles to shore, and opens the shel . Finding nothing inside but an oyster, he
pushes his canoe off again and begins paddling into the lagoon.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

What an incredible waste of time. The reasonable thing to do is not to paddle back to shore with
one oyster, but to dive again and again, to l up the canoe with oysters and then return to shore.

Pearls are rare—a diver must open many oysters before nding one. Only a foolish person would
waste time and energy making a separate trip for each oyster. It’s the same with producing
ideas.Many times we’l produce one or two ideas and proceed as if they are the answers. But
creative ideas, like pearls, occur infrequently. So the sensible thing to do is to produce many
ideas before we evaluate. Just as a good idea may stop you from going on to discover a great
one, a great idea may stop you from discovering the right one.
Increasing your idea production requires conscious effort. Suppose I asked you to spend three
minutes thinking of alternative uses for the common brick. No doubt, you would come up with
some cases, but my hunch is not very many. The average adult comes up with three to six ideas.
However, if I asked you to list forty uses for the brick as fast as you can, you would have quite a
few in a short period of time.
Quota
A quota and time limit focused your energy in a way that guaranteed pro uency of thought. The
quota is not only more effective at focusing your energy, but also a more productive method of
generating alternatives. To meet the quota, you nd yourself listing al the usual uses for a brick
(build a wal , replace, outdoor barbecue, and so on) as wel as listing everything that comes to
mind (anchor, projectiles in riots, bal ast, device to hold down newspaper, a tool for leveling dirt,
material for sculptures, doorstop, and so on) as you stretch your imagination to meet the quota.
By causing us to exert effort, a quota al ows us to generate more imaginative alternatives than we
otherwise would.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

Thomas Edison

guaranteed productivity by giving himself and his assistants idea quotas. His own personal quota
was one minor invention every ten days and a major invention every six months. A way to
guarantee productivity of your creative thought is to give yourself an idea quota, for example, an
idea quota of 40 ideas if you’re looking for ideas alone or a quota of 120 ideas if a group is
brainstorming for ideas. By forcing yourself to come up with forty ideas, you put your internal
critic on hold and write everything down, including the obvious and weak. The rst third wil be
the same old, same old ideas. The second third wil be more interesting and the last third wil show
more insight, curiosity, and complexity.

fl

fi

fl

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

Initial ideas are usual y poorer in quality than later ideas. Just as water must run from a faucet for
a while to be crystal clear, cool, and free of particles, so thought must ow before it becomes
creative. Early ideas are usual y not true ideas. Exactly why this is so is not known, but one
hypothesis is that familiar and safe responses lie closest to the surface of our consciousness, and
therefore, are natural y thought of rst. Creative thinking depends on continuing the ow of ideas
long enough to purge the common, habitual ones and produce the unusual and imaginative.

Fol owing is a list of ve words. Write the rst association that occurs to you for each word.
Now do this ve more times and for each time write an association that is different from the
association you gave the same word on the previous occasions.
123456 Fish Military Government Ocean Automobile
You wil note that the latter associations are much more original and unique than the earlier ones.
The rst responses are the common dominant associations you have for that word. By arranging
to give responses that are not common or dominant, you experience an increase in originality and
imaginativeness of the responses.
When you wish to create something new or to come up with a creative solution to a problem, it is
often necessary to distance yourself from your rstborn ideas as wel . If I want to surprise my
wife on Valentine’s Day, I know that I must disregard the rst idea that comes to mind for what
to do. I probably wil have to disregard the second third and fourth as wel . In order to come up
with something creative we must get beyond our habitual response to intentional y create
something new.
List your ideas.
When you give yourself a quota, you force yourself to list your ideas. Leonardo da Vinci had a
mania for listing and cataloging his thoughts in little notebooks that he carried everywhere. The
thousands of pages of lists that he made constitute the raw material for a huge encyclopedia on
creativity. A habit to consciously cultivate is to always write or list your ideas when
brainstorming. List making wil help you permanently capture your thoughts and ideas, speed up
your thinking, keep you focused, and wil force you to dwel upon alternatives.
Psychologists have demonstrated that the human brain is only able to retain about ve to nine
chunks of information at a time. After about twelve seconds, however, recal is poor, and after
twenty seconds the information wil disappear entirely, unless you keep repeating it to yourself or
write it down.
Writing signals your brain that this piece of information is more crucial than others and should
be stored in long-term memory. If you don’t list your ideas, you’l spend al your mental energy
trying to resurrect old thoughts instead of generating new ones.
Writing or listing your ideas as they occur also speeds up your thinking and focuses your
attention on your subject.
• Speed. Writing ideas speeds up thought. Many of us harbor the il usion that we are fast
thinkers. Visualize the alphabet in capital letters.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

How many letters have curved lines? Observe how your brain thinks. First, you see the A, then B,
and so forth and so on. It’s like watching a slide show. First, one, then the next, one after the
other, one at a time until you’re nished scanning the entire alphabet. This is as fast as your brain
thinks. You think no faster than the speed of life. Visualize a tennis match. Now, speed it up 100

times. Dif cult, isn’t it? We think sequential y, not simultaneously. Incidental y, there are eleven
letters with curved lines in the alphabet.
• Focus. Writing ideas focuses your attention. Another common il usion is the belief that we can
perform multiple tasks at the same time.
For example, I can write a work report, listen to a footbal game, and pay attention to my child at
the same time. If you believe that, try counting by sevens while at the same time counting
backwards by three. You’l nd that you can only do this by alternating. Your thinking is occupied
by one topic until it switches to another. Try thinking of what you did yesterday and what you
wil do tomorrow. Notice how you do this sequential y, not simultaneously.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

Listing ideas is one

of the simplest methods of increasing your conceptual ability, because it does not require a
change in behavior. It’s also surprisingly powerful, because it utilizes the compulsive side of
most of us in a way that makes us into more uent and exible thinkers.
Elaborate on Your Ideas
Contrary to popular belief, Thomas Edison did not invent the lightbulb; his genius, rather, was to
perfect the lightbulb as a consumer item. He took an idea and elaborated on it. Not satis ed with
just the lightbulb, he invented a whole practical system for electric lighting, including dynamos,
conduits, and a means for dividing up current that could il uminate large numbers of bulbs. Later,
when Alexander Graham Bel announced his work on the telephone in 1876, Edison immediately
went to work on ways to elaborate on Bel ’s work. Out of this work, the phonograph, the device
that made Edison a celebrity, emerged one year later.
Pyotr Tchaikovsky, the bril iant Russian composer, set down his ideas in moments of intense
ardor and then spent many days improving, extending, or condensing his ideas. Paul Valery, the
French poet, asserted that stubborn elaboration was an important component of creativity and
took great exception to the suggestion that poets receive the best part of their work from muses.
He cal ed that a concept of savages. His own labor was stubborn, we know—Valery made 250
typed drafts of his masterpiece, “La Jeune Parque.”
Poe wrote that no one point in its composition is referable to divine guidance. Instead, the work
proceeded methodical y, step by step, to its completion, as he made constant modi cations about
every choice, from the poem’s length and themes down to single words.
Even smal changes are signi cant. You meet a friend you haven’t seen in a while. The friend
looks different. You say, “What happened to you? Did you lose weight?” But you’re wrong. You
learn to your embarrassment that it’s because he has grown a mustache or she has a new hair
color. Of course. How could you have missed it?

fi

fi

fl

fl

fi

fi

fi

You missed it because you view your friend as a whole, so that every part of your visual image
inextricably affected every other part. Change one part and the whole seemed changed.

Constantly improve your ideas and the ideas of others by elaborating on them, adding detail,
depth, and dimensions. Physicist Ed Witten has been cal ed the most bril iant physicist of his
generation. He is the master of string theory, a eld as arcane as it is fundamental: It promises to
explain what matter is. Never satis ed, he wakes up each morning with the intention of
improving his ideas. After you’ve emptied your “box” and generated as many ideas as you can,
extend your ideas by elaborating on them by combining or modifying them in some fashion.
SCAMPER

Elaborate on your ideas by applying a checklist of nine creative-thinking principles that were
rst formal y suggested by Alex Osborn and later arranged by Bob Eberle into the fol owing
mnemonic.
S = Substitute?
C = Combine?
A = Adapt?
M = Magnify? Modify? P = Put to other uses? E = Eliminate?
R = Rearrange? Reverse?
SCAMPER is based on the notion that everything new is some addition or modi cation of
something that already exists. You take a subject and change it into something else. (For
example, dril ed petroleum becomes chemical feedstock becomes synthetic rubber becomes
automobile tires.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

Isolate the subject

fi

fi

you want to think about and ask a checklist of questions to see what new ideas and thoughts

fi

fi

It’s the same with ideas and concepts. We view an idea as a whole, “a gestalt,” so that any
change, no matter how minor, affects the whole and the way we see it.

emerge. Think about any subject, from improving the ordinary paper clip to reorganizing your
corporation, and apply the SCAMPER checklist of questions. You’l nd that ideas start popping
up almost involuntarily, when you ask the right questions:
Can I substitute something?
Can I combine it with something else?
Can I adapt something to your subject? Can I magnify or add to it?
Can I modify or change it in some fashion? Can I put it to some other use?
Can I eliminate something from it?
Can I rearrange it?
What happens when I reverse it?
Substitute something? Substitution is a sound way to develop alternative ideas to anything that
exists. Think up ways of changing this for that and that for this. The scientist Paul Ehrlich kept
substituting one color for another—wel over ve hundred colors—until he found the right dye to
color the veins of laboratory mice. You can substitute things, places, procedures, people, ideas,
and even emotions. Ask, Can I substitute something? Who else? What else?
Can the rules be changed?
Other ingredient? Other material? Other power? Other place? Other approach?
What else instead? What other part instead of this?
Combine it with something else? Much of creative thinking involves combining previously
unrelated ideas or subjects to make something new.
This process is cal ed synthesis and is regarded by many experts as the essence of creativity.
Gregor Mendel created a whole new scienti c discipline, genetics, by combining mathematics
with biology.
What can be combined?
Can we combine purposes?
How about an assortment? A blend? An al oy? An ensemble?
Combine units? Combine materials? What other article could be merged with this?
How could we package a combination?
What can be combined to multiply possible uses?
Combine appeals?

fi

fi

fi

fi

Adapt something to it? One of the paradoxes of creativity is that, in order to think original y, we
must rst familiarize ourselves with the ideas of others. Thomas Edison put it this way: “Make it
a habit to keep on the lookout for novel and interesting ideas that others have used successful y.

Your idea needs to be original only in its adaptation to the problem you are working on.” Ask,
What else is like this? What other ideas does it suggest? Does the past offer a paral el?
What could I copy? Whom could I emulate?
What idea could I incorporate?
What other process could be adapted? What else could be adapted?
What different contexts can I put my concept in?
What ideas outside my eld can I incorporate?
Magnify it? An easy way to create a new idea is to take a subject and add something to it.
Japanese engineer Yuma Shiraishi made the home VCR possible by guring out how to lengthen
videotapes so they would be long enough for feature-length movies. Ask, What can be
magni ed, made larger, or extended?
What can be exaggerated? Overstated?
What can be added? More time? Stronger? Higher? Longer?
How about greater frequency? Extra features? What can be duplicated? What can add extra
value?
How can I carry it to a dramatic extreme?
Modify it? What can be modi ed? Just about any aspect of anything. The hub-and-spoke
transportation system that makes Federal Express work was a feature of at least three air freight
services as early as 1930. What Fred Smith did was to modify the dimensions, process, and
purposes of the system and turn an old idea into an elegant concept. Ask,
How can this be altered for the better? What can be modi ed? Is there a new twist?
Change meaning, color, motion, sound, odor, form, shape? Change name?
What changes can be made in the plans? In the process? In marketing? Other changes?
What other form could this take? What other package? Can the package be combined with the
form?
Put it to some other use? A subject takes its meaning from its context. Change the context, and
you change the meaning. George Washington Carver, botanist and chemist, discovered over three
hundred different uses for the lowly peanut. Ask, What else can this be used for?
Are there new ways to use this as is? Other uses if modi ed?
What else can be made from this? Other extension? Other markets?

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Eliminate? Sometimes subtracting something from your subject yields new ideas. Trimming
down ideas, objects, and processes may gradual y narrow the subject down to its truly necessary
part or function—or spotlight a part that’s appropriate for some other use. Ask, What if this were
smal er? Understate?

What should I omit? Delete? Subtract? What’s not necessary? Should I divide it? Split it up?
Separate it into different parts? Streamline? Make miniature? Condense? Compact?
Can the rules be eliminated?
Rearrange it into something else? Creativity, it could be said, consists largely of rearranging what
we know in order to nd out what we do not know. Rearrangement usual y offers countless
alternatives for ideas, goods, and services. A basebal manager, for example, can shuf e the
lineup 362,880 times. Ask,
What other arrangement might be better?
Interchange components?
Other pattern? Other layout? Other sequence? Change the order?
Transpose cause and effect?
Change pace? Change schedule?
Reverse it to see what happens? Reversing your perspective opens your thinking. Look at
opposites, and you’l see things you normal y miss.
Ask, “What is the opposite of this?” to nd a new way of looking at things. The historical
breakthroughs of Columbus and Copernicus were the polar opposites of the current beliefs of
their day. Ask,
What are the opposites?
What are the negatives?
Can I transpose positive and negative?
Should I turn it around? Up instead of down? Down instead of up?
Consider it backwards?
Reverse roles?
Do the unexpected?
To a genius, al ideas are in a state of constant ux. There can be no such thing as an ultimate
idea, just as there cannot be the ultimate poem that would make al further poems unnecessary or
the ultimate symphony that would render al further musical composition redundant and
unnecessary.

fi

fl

fl

fi

fi

Al ideas can be improved by elaborating upon them.Most people feel that there must be
inadequacy or fault before we look for ways to improve things. (if it’s not broke don’t x it…)

Take it apart
An easy way to elaborate on your ideas is to take them apart and improve or change one part at a
time. Imagine renovating a house with many rooms. Each of the rooms is part of the function of
the house, and we tend to think of one “house” instead of a building composed of many rooms.
To change the nature of the house, you do not blow it up and build a different one. It is much
more productive to shift your focus from the one “house”
to the many separate “rooms” and improve one room at a time. By converting a few rooms, you
can convert a large house made up of many rooms into a mansion. Every idea is a house of many
rooms. To elaborate on your idea, take the problem and improve one part at a time.
To read a text, one has to consider the words one by one, then the sentences the words make up,
not the total number of letters written on the page. Leonardo believed that, to understand things,
you begin with the detail and move from one detail to another.
Moving from one detail to another leads to original or novel ideas through the assembling of al
the possibilities. Try listing the attributes (attributes are characteristics, parts, or dimensions) of
your subject and then focusing your attention on each attribute in turn. Think of ways to change
or improve each attribute by asking yourself the SCAMPER questions. For example, if you
wanted to develop a new of ce procedure or work ow, you could rst identify and list al the
steps taken. Then go through the checklist of questions to trigger ideas on how to improve or
change each step.
Suppose you wanted to improve the common toaster.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

You would do the

fol owing:
1. List the attributes on a sheet of paper. Some of the attributes of a toaster are
• Made of metal or plastic
• Uses outside power source
• Operated by pushing a lever down • Toast “pops” up when done
• Heated coils
• Toast bread vertically
2. For each attribute, ask, “How else can this be accomplished? and “Why does this have to be
this way?” Come up with as many alternatives as you can for each attribute.

fi

fl

fi

3. See if you can change or improve each attribute by asking the SCAMPER questions. You
might end up with something like a see-through toaster with heat- resistant glass sides that let the
user see the bread as it toasts. The sides can be removed for easy cleaning. In addition, the toaster
pivots to al ow for both vertical and horizontal open-face toasting.

Listing attributes helps you think beyond your stereotypical notions of things. We usual y
describe an object by its function, a description that grows out of our experience and observation.
But the function of an object is not inherent in the object itself. Instead, it comes from our
association with it. In one experiment, a group of subjects were rst taught how to use tools in
their conventional ways—for example, pliers to grip and unfasten wires or a paper clip to hold
papers together. Then they were presented with problems that could only be solved through using
the tools in unconventional ways. They solved 11 percent of the problems. Another group was
given the same tools without instruction and presented the same problems. They scored 97
percent successes. - Remember the cake cutting thing.
Because the one group was xated on the ordinary, conventional uses of tools, they were unable
to use the tools in unconventional and novel ways to solve the problems. Focusing on attributes
helps clear away this xation on stereotypic functions. Often, if you consider the attributes of
subjects, you’l come up with different conclusions than if you operate with your stereotypes.
By examining “steel shank” as a separate attribute, we can move away from our stereotypic label
of a screwdriver and come up with new applications. Possible other uses include probe, pointer,
plug, shoe horn, paint-can opener, weapon, measuring rod, tool to remove paper jams from
copiers, prying device, minidowel, telephone dialer, and so on.
Principle of common fate: Events that seem to be continuous are likely to be seen as a single
entity rather than as discrete events.

The dot is actually closer to the vertical line that the horizontal.
Suppose we want to improve the revolving door of the kind used in of ce buildings and
department stores. We could list the attributes of a revolving door and then focus on each
attribute one at a time. The fol owing attributes might be listed:
• Has individual compartments
• Pushing it manual y creates the energy to move it • Made of glass to see through
• One or more people pushing it around at a time

fi

fi

fi

fi

The attribute “pushing it manual y creates the energy” inspires one to think of ways to harness al
that energy that is being voluntarily created by thousands of people pushing through the door
each day. This triggers the idea of modifying the revolving door to make electricity from the

Written Records
Another habit to cultivate is keeping a written record of your creative attempts in a notebook, on
le cards, or in your computer. A record not only guarantees that the thoughts and ideas wil last,
since they are committed to paper or computer les, but wil goad you into other thoughts and
ideas. The simple act of recording his ideas enabled Leonardo da Vinci to dwel on his ideas and
improve them over time by elaborating on them.
Thus, Leonardo was able to take simple concepts and work them into incredible complex
inventions that were years ahead of their time, such as the helicopter, the bicycle, and the diving
suit.
Edison’s Notebooks
Leonardo da Vinci was Thomas Edison’s spiritual mentor, and Edison’s notebooks il ustrate the
strength of their spiritual kinship. Fol owing da Vinci’s example, Edison relentlessly recorded
and il ustrated every step of his voyage to discovery in his 3,500 notebooks that were discovered
after his death in 1931. Keeping a written record of his work was a signi cant key to his genius.
His notebooks got him into the fol owing habits:
• They enabled him to cross-fertilize ideas, techniques, and conceptual models by transferring
them from one problem to the next. For example, when it became clear in 1900 that an iron-ore
mining venture in which Edison was nancial y committed was failing and on the brink of
bankruptcy, he spent a weekend poring over his notebooks and came up with a detailed plan to
redirect the company’s efforts toward the manufacture of Portland cement, which could
capitalize on the same model as the iron-ore company.
• Whenever he succeeded with a new idea, Edison would review his notebooks to rethink ideas
and inventions he’d abandoned in the past in the light of what he’d recently learned. If he was
mental y blocked working on a new idea, he would review his notebooks to see if there was
some thought or insight that could trigger a new approach. For example, Edison took his
unsuccessful work to develop an undersea telegraph cable-variable resistance—and incorporated
it into the design of a telephone transmitter that adapted to the changing sound waves of the cal
er’s voice. This technique instantly became the industry standard.

fi

fi

fi

fi

• Edison would often jot down his observations of the natural world, failed patents and research
papers written by other inventors, and ideas others had come up with in other elds. He would
also routinely comb a wide variety of diverse publications for novel ideas that sparked his
interest and record them in his notebooks. He made it a habit to look out for novel and interesting
ideas that others had used successful y on other problems in other elds. To Edison, an idea
needed to be original only in its adaptation to the problem he was working on.

fi

fi

force of people pushing it around. Separating the revolving door into attributes broke our
stereotypical notion of a revolving door and inspired us to think of energy and of a creative way
to use the door to harness that energy.

• Edison also studied his notebooks of past inventions and ideas to use as springboards for other
inventions and ideas in their own right.
To Edison, his diagrams and notes on the telephone (sounds transmitted) suggested the
phonograph (sounds recorded), which, in turn, suggested motion pictures (images recorded).
Simple in retrospect, isn‘t it? Genius usual y is.
Walt Whitman was another genius who col ected ideas to stimulate his creative potential. His
journals describe an ingenious technique he developed for recording ideas. Any time an idea
would strike his imagination, he would write it down on a smal slip of paper. He placed these
slips into various envelopes that he titled according to the subject area each envelope contained.
In order to have a place for each new idea he encountered, Whitman kept ideas in many different
envelopes.
Whitman, whenever he felt a need to spawn new thoughts or perspectives, would select the
various envelopes pertaining to his current subject or interests. He retrieved ideas from the
envelopes, randomly at times, or on other occasions, only those ideas relevant to his subject; then
he would
“weave” these ideas together as if he were creating an idea tapestry. These idea tapestries often
became the foundation for a new poem or essay.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

Fol owing are

guidelines for keeping a written record:
1. Col ect al interesting ideas that you encounter from brainstorming sessions, ideas you read
about, or ideas you create.
2. Record them thematical y in a notebook, in your computer, or on note cards, and le them by
subject (organizational improvement, sales presentations, new markets, new product ideas, etc.)
in a le box. In the event you need further information about an idea, indicate the source where
you found the idea. Cross- reference any ideas that may t into several different categories.
3. Once you have developed a fairly extensive idea base, use it to glean insight when you have a
problem.
Whenever you experience a problem, retrieve ideas from your le that you feel may apply to
your need. Spread the ideas out before you and review them. Use the fol owing suggestions to
select the ideas most suited to your needs: 1. Select ideas containing attributes closely related to
your subject’s attributes.
2. Once you have selected several ideas from the larger group, prepare to apply the ideas to your
current needs. You may realize that the entire idea applies or only one procedure or portion of the
idea applies. Likewise, ideas may have to be modi ed in order to apply them to the situation.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

3. Combine and apply appropriate attributes or procedures from two or more ideas.Geniuses
recognize the essential merits and attributes of a good idea and can adapt these elements to their

subjects, thereby “creating” a new idea. Many original ideas are secondhand, consciously or
unconsciously drawn from a mil ion outside sources and used by the garnerer with pride and
satisfaction. Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company, once said that his simple genius
was the ability to create something new from the ideas and inventions of others.
Mind Popping
When you keep a historical record of your ideas and problems, you initiate a phenomenon that
George Mandler, a leading researcher in the problems of consciousness, cal s “mind popping.”
Mind popping is when a solution or idea seems to appear, after a period of incubation, out of
nowhere.
Suppose Your notebook contains
• Information about the problem you are working on
• Information about other ideas, concepts, and problems you are currently working on By
periodical y reviewing your notebook, you activate al the recorded information in your conscious
and subconscious mind. You’ve now set up a mental system of network thinking where ideas,
images, and concepts from completely unrelated problems combine to catalyze the nascent
moment of creativity. This necessarily nonlinear thought process can occur unconsciously—and
not necessarily in real time.
Concepts combine like light rays focusing at a point and pop into your consciousness.
In the il ustration below, A represents the brain cel connections of an average brain working on a
problem, while B represents the brain cel connections of a brain that is constantly stimulated by
recording and reviewing of information.

Recording your work plants the information in your subconscious mind and somehow activates
relevant patterns so it can be processed into a mind-popping solution, even after a long delay
during which the problem is abandoned.

THINKING FLUENTLY T -

To experience

“mind popping,” try the fol owing experiment. Write a letter to your unconscious about a
problem you have been working on. Make the letter as detailed as possible. Describe the

Thomas Edison sometimes slept on a table in his laboratory so that he could start work as soon as
he woke up and not forget anything.
Subconsciousness Doesn’t Stop when you sleep.
Try this exercise before you go to sleep. Take a few minutes and review a problem that you are
stuck on. Write down the key words on a sheet of paper and put the paper on your bed stand.
Forget the problem and go to sleep. When you wake up, look at the paper. You wil probably
think of new insights, wil see the problem more clearly, and may get a “mind popping” idea
Ideas hanging on the conscious mind. When you let them go and move on to other things you
release them to the subconsciousness where they bounce around on each other.

We think of a creative genius as a mysterious person who spontaneously creates ideas out of the
blue. This is not so. This is not how a creative genius gets ideas. He or she get ideas by working
hard and incorporating deliberate thinking practices.

fi

fi

problem, what steps you have taken, the gaps, what is needed, what the obstacles are, the ideal
solution, and so on. Instruct your subconscious to nd the solution. Write “Your mission is to
nd the solution to the problem. I would like the solution in two days.” Seal the letter and put it
away. Forget it. Open the letter in two days. If the problem stil has not been solved, write on the
bottom of the letter, “Let me know the minute you solve this.” Sooner or later, when you are
most relaxed and removed, ideas and solutions wil pop up from your subconscious.

Creative geniuses think uently and exibly. Fluent thinking means to generate quantities of
ideas and exible thinking means to think beyond the ordinary and conventional nature of things.
Geniuses are uent thinkers because of the fol owing practices. They
• Defer judgment when looking for ideas
• Generate as many ideas as possible
• List their ideas as they occur and keep a written record
• Constantly elaborate or improve their ideas
• Al ow their subconscious to generate ideas by incubating their subject
Geniuses are exible thinkers because they extend their thinking by incorporating random,
chance, and unrelated factors into their thinking processes.
STRATEGY FOUR: MAKING NOVEL COMBINATIONS
In his book Scienti c Genius, psychologist Dean Keith Simonton of the University of California
at Davis suggests that geniuses are geniuses because they form more novel combinations than the
merely talented. He suggests that, in a loose sense, genius and chance are synonymous. His
theory has etymology behind it: cogito—“ I think”—original y connoted “shake together”;
intelligo, the root of intelligence, means to “select among.”
This is a clear, early intuition about the utility of permitting ideas and thoughts to randomly
combine with each other and the utility of selecting from the many the few to retain.
In the il ustration, the square seems to be deformed (the sides seem to be bent). It is not. The
sides of the square are perfectly straight. Place a straight edge along the sides of the square to
determine this for yourself. Combining a perfect square with a circular background changes our
perception of the gure.

Creativity takes place in the perceptual phase of thinking. This is where our perceptions and
concepts are formed, and this is where they have to be changed.
In the same way, combining information in novel ways increases your perceptual possibilities to
create something original.

fl

fl

fi

fi

fl

fl

fl

Consider Einstein’s equation, E=mc2. Einstein did not invent the concepts of energy, mass, or the
speed of light. Rather, he combined these concepts in a novel and useful way.

Einstein vaguely referred to the way he thought as “combinatory play”. To Einstein, this
combinatory play seemed to be the essential feature in his creative thought.
A number of techniques fol ow that are designed to help you get original and novel ideas through
the chance combination of dissimilar subjects, ideas, concepts, and thoughts. The rst technique
is modeled after one of Leonardo da Vinci’s favorite thinking strategies. He believed that once
you listed a set of distinctions, you could generate new possibilities by combining them in
various ways, or l in holes and missing links by anticipating features that have not yet been
encountered. Combining key elements for the purpose of constructing something new was a
cornerstone of his genius.
Da Vinci’s Technique

fi

fi

fi

Leonardo’s grotesque heads and famous caricatures are examples of the random variations of the
human face made of different combinations of a set number of features. He would rst list facial
characteristics (heads, eyes, noses, etc.) and then, beneath each, list variations. Next he would
mix and match the different variations to create original and grotesque caricatures. Below is a
hypothetical example of a box similar to one that da Vinci might have constructed:

While the number of items in each category is relatively smal , there are thousands of possible
combinations of the listed features. The circled features indicate only one out of thousands of
different groupings of features that could be used for an original grotesque head.
Leonardo da Vinci would analyze the structure of a subject and then separate the major
parameters (“parameter” means a characteristic, factor, variable, or aspect). He would then list
variations for each parameter and combine them. By coming up with different combinations of
the variations of the parameters, he created new ideas.
Think of the parameters as card suits (hearts, spades, clubs, and diamonds) and the variations as
the different cards within each suit. By experimenting with different combinations of the
variations, you create new ideas.

Making Novel Combinations T -

To use da

Vinci’s technique, fol ow these procedures:
1. Specify the chal enge.
2. Separate the parameters of the chal enge. The parameters are the fundamental framework of
the chal enge. You choose the nature and the number of parameters that you wish to use in your

box. A good question to ask yourself when selecting parameters is “Would the chal enge stil exist
without the parameter I’m considering adding to the box?”
3. Below each parameter, list as many variations for the parameters as you wish. The complexity
of the box is determined by the number of parameters and the number of variations used. The
more variations and the more variety to the variations of each parameter, the more likely the box
wil contain a viable idea. For instance, a box with ten parameters, each of which has ten
variations, produces ten bil ion combinations of the parameters and the variations.
4. When you are nished listing variations, make random runs through the parameters and the
variations for the parameters, selecting one or more from each column, and assemble the
combinations into entirely new forms. During this step, al of the combinations can be examined
with respect to the chal enge to be solved. If you are working with ten or more parameters, you
may nd it helpful to randomly examine the entire group, and then gradual y restrict yourself to
portions that appear to be particularly fruitful.
et’s look at an example. A car-wash owner wanted to nd an idea for a new market or new
market extension. He analyzed the activity of “product washing” and decided to work with four
parameters: “method of washing,” “products washed,” “equipment used,” and “other products
sold.”

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

He listed the parameters and listed ve variations for each parameter. He listed four parameters
on top. Under each parameter he listed ve variations for each parameter. He randomly chose
one or more items from each parameter and connected them to form a new business.

New Business: The random combination of parameters (“self,” “dogs,” “brushes,” “stal s,”
“sprayers,” “dryers,” “related products”) inspired an idea for a new business. The new business
he created was a self-service dog wash. The self-service dog wash has ramps leading to waisthigh tubs where owners spray the dogs, scrub them with brushes provided by the wash, shampoo
them, and blow-dry them. In addition to the wash, he also sel s his own line of dog products,
such as shampoos and conditioners. Pet owners now wash their dogs, while their cars are being
washed in the ful -service car wash.
Five alternatives for each parameter generates 3,125 possible different combinations. If only 10
percent prove useful, that would yield 312 new ideas. In theory, if you list the appropriate
parameters and variations, you should have al of the possible combinations for a speci ed chal
enge. In practice, your parameters may be incomplete or a critical variation for a parameter may
not have been described. When you feel this may be the case, you should reconsider the
parameters you speci ed and adjust the parameters or the variations accordingly.
We tend to see the elements of our subject as one continuous “whole” and do not see many of the
relationships between the elements, even the obvious ones. They become almost invisible
because of the way we perceive things. Yet these relationships are often the links to new ideas.
When you break down a subject into different parts and combine the parts in various ways, you
restructure your perception of the subject. This perceptual restructuring leads to new insights,
ideas, and new lines of speculation.

Gestalt psychologist Wolfgang Köhler demonstrated perceptual restructuring with animals. He
would present an ape with a problem in which bananas were displayed out of reach and could
only be obtained by using techniques new in the ape’s experience. For example, Köhler would
give an ape boxes to play with for a few days. Then he would hang bananas from the ceiling out
of the ape’s reach. When he placed the boxes behind the ape, it would try al the familiar ways of
reaching the fruit and fail. When he placed the boxes in front of the ape so that they were visible,
the ape would sit and think and suddenly have an insight and use the boxes to stand on to reach
the bananas. What happened was that the visibility of the information restructured the ape’s
perception. It suddenly saw the boxes not as playthings but as supports to build a structure. It
saw the relationship between the boxes and bananas.

fi

fi

fi

fi

A food company wanted new ideas for products and markets for tuna. Fol owing are the
parameters they used and their variations. They used the parameters “uses for tuna sh,” “kinds
of containers,” “products used with tuna sh,” and “how tuna is seasoned.”

These variables triggered many new ideas. One idea that was marketed was portable, singleserve, pul -top cans of water-packed tuna with packets of mayo and pickle relish, whole wheat
crackers, and a mixing spoon. Other ideas included canola-oil tuna for variety and tuna mix-ins,
which are low-fat seasoning packets that require no mayo.
The food company also saw an associative link between mayo and tuna that inspired them to
work on developing a synthetic mayo that can be premixed and canned with the tuna, instead of
being packaged separately. The food company broke apart their chal enge into discrete parts,
which opened the way for them to seethe parts from al sides at once and to recombine those parts
in new ways.
Inventive Problem Solving
A useful technique for escaping from the xed parts of a problem is to break the parts down into
stil smal er parts and then recombine these smal er units to form larger novel units. It is usual y
much easier to put together subparts in different formations than to divide the situation into novel
parts from the rst.

Making Novel Combinations T -

The larger

the repertoire of relationships that can be handled with con dence, the more original can be the
lines of division, the ways of looking at a situation.
1. First, select the parameters or dimensions. You can select as many as you want. It’s suggested
that you select at least four.

fi

fi

fi

2. List as many variations as you can for each parameter. (See the example below.) 3. Make
random runs linking one or more variations in each column with one or more in other columns.

4. Force each random combination of variations into new ideas. 5. Keep trying different
combinations.
For example, a Midwestern town wanted a more reliable way to warn people about approaching
dangers, such as oods, tornadoes, earthquakes, and so on. The parameters they selected were
• How to locate people
• How to get their attention
• How to deliver the desired message
• How to get the desired reaction from the citizens
They then randomly linked the variations to trigger ideas. One of the combinations (“Bel s,”
“Telephone,” “Find protection,” “Information”) with “al the ways to locate people” triggered the
idea to make an arrangement with the telephone company to cause al the telephones throughout
the city (including cel phones and public phones) to ring. When answered, the phones relay a
prerecorded message informing people about the particular emergency and instructing people
what to do. Additional y, they employed a mass-media advertising campaign that told of the
danger alert system and how it works.

Key-Word Combinations
Creative thinking is often a matter of forming new associations, new syntheses, or new
combinations of elements of existing knowledge, rather than producing something that is new in
every respect.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Look for

new ideas in your business by analyzing the variables of your business, listing components, and
making random combinations:

fl

1. First, ask, “What is our business?” and “What should our business be?” These questions wil
help focus your attention. For example, the business of a publisher is not producing books, it’s
information and entertainment, and the business of a telephone company is not providing
telephones, it’s service.

2. Next, de ne the variables of your business. For instance, some variables for a typical business
are products, services, markets, functions, technologies, pricing, distribution, management, and
so on. Select four or ve that you believe to be the most signi cant.
3. Under each variable, list the attributes or components. Create a key-word index. Use key
words to describe the components or attributes of each variable. Fol owing is a key-word index
for a business book publisher.
4. Mix and match your products, functions, markets, technologies, and services in various ways
to explore new ideas, for instance, connecting electronic networks, information, resources,
Internet, print, and information services to trigger the idea of an electronic data bank.
The bank would contain al the information from the publisher’s backlist of business books. The
information would be sold as a business resource by way of a computer network for businesses
and over the Internet.

In key-word combinations, we predetermine the variables by de ning our business, extend our
thinking by using key words, and then make random combinations. Another interesting exercise
is to write al possible characteristics, components, or dimensions for your business as key words
on cards or slips of paper, one per card. Come up with as many as you can and then randomly
draw them from a shbowl, a box, or a similar container. The fol owing are some common
examples.
Communication Character Strength
People
Color
Quality Cohesion Shape Characteristics Design Package Dimensions Movement Size
Patterns Position

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Parts
Purpose
Materials
Image Opportunities Functions

Trends
Options
Obstacles
Research Competition Information Environment Value Functions
Products
Partnership
Expense
Bene ts
Success
Technology
Markets
Service
Prices
Management Distribution Staff
Space Process
Whenever you are thinking about a business problem, randomly draw three to six cards from the
box. List any and al thoughts that each card triggers and then combine the thoughts. Suppose we
want to create a new product promotion, and we pul ed the cards “design,” “bene ts,” and
“image.” Under each, list the thoughts that the cards inspire. Look for ways to satisfy the
requirements of “design,” “bene ts,” and “image” in a new product promotion. Extend your
thinking by listing as many thoughts as you can.
Read through the thoughts and let your imagination begin to form ideas. Then make random
combinations from the separate thoughts and force the combinations into new ideas. Continue
making random combinations until you have the ideas you want. The key thoughts “frequently
handled,”
“something that surprises,” “immediate reward,” and “authorized by some authority” combined
into a new idea for the company running a grand lottery that bene ts the Alzheimer’s
Foundation. The promotion for the lottery, the tickets, the winner’s celebration would al be tied
in to the product promotion.

fi

fi

fi

fi

A physicist I know makes systematic use of the idea that new associations may be formed by
accidental combination. He wil cut up indexes of physics textbooks and then throw the fragments

into a shbowl. Lastly, he wil draw out several at a time to see whether any new useful
combinations emerge. This simple technique has produced insights and ideas that he could not
generate using his usual way of thinking. Cut up an index of a book in your eld, for example, a
marketing book if you are in marketing, and try the same technique.
Combining Existing Information
We possess an abundance of thoughts about most of our problems. By organizing our thoughts
ef ciently, we can systematical y create combinations that wil generate multiple solutions to
problems.

Making Novel Combinations T -

The fol

owing is a technique designed to help you recognize items of existing knowledge about a subject
and how to combine different items:
1. Col ect al available material relating to the problem.
2. Think of every factor related to the problem, regardless of its importance, and write each
factor on a smal card.
3. Look for connections between the cards. Group them into general categories.
4. Keep integrating and grouping them until they are reduced to four to six main groups. Place a
new card on top of each group that describes the general category (the title card). These nal
groups are the fundamental dimensions, or parameters, of the problem.
5. On a blank sheet of paper, write the parameters across the top. Below each parameter, list its
components from the cards. 6. Cut the sheet into vertical strips. Each strip wil contain one
parameter and its components.
7. Lay the strips side by side. If you move each strip up and down, you’l notice new relationships
between the components, which in turn may trigger new ideas or creative solutions.
An optional way to display the information is to tape the title cards to a wal . Below each
parameter, tape the appropriate cards. Make random runs through the parameters and their
components, selecting one or more components from each column and assemble into new
combinations.
Combining the Unrelated

fi

fi

fi

fi

Combining the Unrelated

When the lines at the left are combined to form the gure on the right, we see the original two
patterns only with great effort. Instead, we see a continuous wavy line running through a series
of bars. Combining the lines creates a new pattern with new properties. The il ustration veri es
the seemingly obvious point that from a combination can emerge new properties that were not
evident in either of the original lines.
It is the same with concepts and ideas. Gregory Murphy of the University of Il inois had people
rate how true certain properties were of individual concepts and their combinations. One set of
concepts consisted of the individual words “empty” and “store” and their combination “empty
store.”

Making Novel Combinations T -

Consider

the property “losing money.” Like subjects in Murphy’s study, you probably recognize that
losing money is typical of “empty stores,” but not of “stores” in general or of things that are
“empty.” Meaning changes when we combine concepts, and the more novel the combination, the
more novel the new meaning. This is why genius is often marked by an interest in combining
previously unrelated ideas, goods, and services, making novel combinations more likely. There
are many different ways to create novel combinations: Random Objects
Select twenty objects at random. You can select any objects, objects at home, objects at work, or
objects you might nd walking down the street.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Or you can imagine you are in a technological y oriented science museum, walking through the
Smithsonian Institute, or browsing in an electronic store and make a list of twenty objects that
you would likely see. Make two lists of ten objects each on the left and right sides of the paper
(see example that fol ows). Pick one from the left and combine it with one on the right. When
you nd a promising new combination, re ne and elaborate it into a new invention.

In the example the il ustrated combinations yielded the fol owing ideas:
• Combining a bagel with slicer yields a bagel slicer with plastic sides designed to hold the bagel
and prevent rotation when slicing.
• Bathtub and hammock combines into a baby tub with a simple hammock in the tub with a
headrest to hold the baby’s head securely, leaving the parent’s hands free to do the washing.
• Sunglasses and windows combine to form the idea of tinted house windows, like tinted
sunglasses, designed to change colors with ultraviolet light to help keep the house cool.
• Suntan lotion and insect repel ent combines to form a new product—one lotion that protects
against both the sun and insects.
You can also try the inverse heuristic to generate ideas, which states that if an object performs
one function, a new artifact might be realized by combining it with an object that performs the
opposite function. The claw hammer is a good example. So is a pencil with an eraser. Can you
create new objects from the list of random objects by combining the object with something that
performs the opposite function. How about a smal cap for tightly sealing a soda can that could be
attached to the lever of the pop-top device?
What is the gure in the fol owing il ustration?

fi

It can be seen as either a duck or a rabbit. If you focus on the left you see a duck, and if you
focus on the right, you see a rabbit, as the duck’s beak becomes the rabbit’s ears. A novel image

is created by integrating two different images into one. In the same way, when we randomly
combined dissimilar objects, we easily created many novel products.
Albert Rothenberg, in his book The Emerging Goddess, de nes this as “homospatial thinking.”
Combining Subjects from Unrelated Fields

Making Novel Combinations T -

When

looking for original ideas, try combining subjects from unrelated elds. Among combinations,
the most fertile wil often be those formed of elements drawn from domains that are far apart. For
example, one entrepreneur created two lists of objects: One list contained household objects, and
the other list contained objects from the world of sports. The combination of “laundry hamper”
with “basketbal ” inspired him to create a new laundry hamper fashioned into a basketbal net,
approximately forty inches long, attached to a cylindrical hoop and hung on a backboard that is
attached to a door. This al ows kids to play basketbal with dirty laundry as they “stuff” the
basket. When it is ful , a tug on a drawstring releases the clothes.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Another

way to make random combinations with subjects from unrelated elds is to select two unrelated
subjects, break each subject down by listing its attributes, and then randomly combine the
attributes. Suppose, for example, you want to invent a new product. You would rst select two
objects that interest you. Make two lists of the objects’ attributes or characteristics and randomly
combine them to trigger ideas. For example, we select “bedroom” and “automobile.” Some of
their attributes are as fol ows:

Combining “sense of security” and “automatic door locks” inspires the idea of a master lock near
the bed, which locks and unlocks al windows, doors, computer systems, and everything else in
the house with one key. Combining “window shades” and “moves” triggers the idea of
incorporating light sensors into window shades that automatical y raise or lower the shades
according to the intensity of the outside light.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Combining attributes of different subjects is a quick way to generate ingenious ideas.

Suppose you wanted a new advertising campaign. Select two advertising campaigns from
different elds that you liked (for example, an advertising program for a political campaign and
an advertising program for a sports team). List the attributes of each program in two columns and
then make random connections until you create ideas for a new campaign. Or suppose you
wanted to improve of ce morale. Then you would identify two of ces from different elds (a
dentist’s of ce and your spouse’s of ce) that had terri c morale, list the attributes of each, and
then make random connections to come up with new and different ideas to improve morale in
your of ce.
Combining Problems
Thomas Edison’s lab was a big barn with worktables throughout the room holding separate
projects in progress. He would work on one project and then another. His workshop was
designed to al ow one project to affect a neighboring one, so that moves made here may also be
tried there.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Use a

notebook to do in time what Edison’s workshop did in space. Work on two or more unrelated
problems in paral el. One problem might be about nding the capital and resources for a new
project. Another problem might be about improving the employee evaluation system, and stil
another might be a new advertising campaign. When you’re stonewal ed on one problem, move
to the next. When you come up with ideas or moves that work for one problem, try the ideas or
related ideas with the other as wel .
Combining Words
The French poet Paul Valery believed that it takes two different thinking strategies to invent
something new in writing a poem. With one strategy, you make up combinations, and with the
other you choose what is important. Fol owing are some techniques that take words and combine
them in different ways.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Identify

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

the main verb and noun in the problem you are trying to solve. Generate words similar in
meaning to the main verb and noun and list them in two separate columns. Use a thesaurus.
Select a word from the rst list, combine it with a word from the second list, and use this
combination to generate ideas. Try different combinations. For example, suppose you wanted to
reduce con ict between two opposing departments. Your lists might look like this:

Consider the fol owing combinations: “dilute-discord” triggers the idea to reduce the number of
interactions between the departments; “downgrade-discord” triggers the thought to downgrade
departmental performance ratings until the con ict diminishes, and “discount-disharmony”
encourages one to ignore the con ict and hope it resolves itself.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Another

way to generate ideas is to take a problem apart and randomly combine the words in different
ways. Suppose you want to encourage employees to daily clean up their work areas at the of ce.
Write the words or major phrases on slips of paper or index cards—one thought per card. For
example, in our problem our words would be “encourage,” “employees,” “work areas,” “work,”
“clean up,” “of ce,” and “daily.” Shuf e the cards and place them face down. Randomly select
two, combine the words, and try to force an idea. Keep shuf ing and combining until you get the
ideas you want. “Encourage-work areas” leads one to think of making the environment more
pleasant by increasing the accessibility of trash receptacles. “Employees-encourage” inspires the
formation of quality circle discussion groups. “Daily-of ce” motivates the idea of setting aside a
certain time period at the end of the day for each employee to clean his or her work space.

Making Novel Combinations T -

A third

technique using words is to rst generate a list of nouns ( ve to ten or so) and another list of
adjectives and verbs that pertain to your subject. Each noun should represent some aspect of or
the essence of your subject. Use a thesaurus if you wish. The list of adjectives and verbs should
be freely associated (write whatever adjectives and verbs come to mind). Next randomly choose
a noun from the rst list and combine it with an adjective or verb from the second list and use
this combination to generate ideas. Try different combinations. This is the technique that I used
to create the title for my book Thinkertoys: A Handbook of Business Creativity for the 90s . I
randomly combined “toys” and “think.” Then, I reversed it to “think toys.” Next, I elaborated on
the words to “Thinking Toys” and combined the two again into “Thinkertoys.”

fi

fl

fi

fi

fl

fl

fl

fi

fi

fi

Here is an example of how to use this technique to discover new product or service ideas for
commercial airlines. List A contains nouns that capture some aspect or essence of airliners and
List B contains adjectives and verbs.

Combine Ideas
J. Bronowski, the author of the book The Ascent of Man, claimed that “a genius is a person who
has two great ideas.” The work of genius arises from the person’s ability to get them to t
together. In 1979, physicist Alan Guth was puzzling over magnetic monopoles-hypothetical
chunks of magnetic north poles divorced from any south. He was also playing around with a total
y different idea, the odd notion of “false vacuums” freezing and unifying the forces of nature.
Combining these two unlikely subjects, he hit upon no less than a new theory of genesis. His
“in ation theory”

Making Novel Combinations T -

Try this

strategy to combine ideas. Col ect al your ideas and put them into two columns, column A and
column B. Either list them on paper or write them on cards, and put them into two piles or tape
them onto the wal in two columns. Randomly connect one idea from column A and one idea
from column B. Try to combine the two into one idea. See how many viable combinations you
can make.
In a group brainstorming session, ask each participant to silently write or print ve or six ideas
on index cards. Then have each participant prioritize their ideas and select one. The facilitator col
ects and places the leftover cards face up on a table. Next, ask the participants to come to the
table, review the leftover ideas, select one and then return to their seat. This is also done silently
and should take about ve to ten minutes.
Final y, ask each participant to combine their idea with the one they selected from the leftover
pile to create a new idea.
Combine elements of extreme ideas

Making Novel Combinations T -

Create

fi

fi

fi

fl

two opposite extreme ideas. For instance, what idea would you create if you had al the resources
(people, money, time, etc.) in the world? Then, ask what idea would you create if you had no

resources? And then try to combine the two into something practical. Think of the elements and
attributes of each extreme and then make random connections between the two lists of extremes.
Suppose you want to reward employees for ideas that increase productivity. One extreme would
be to award each employee one mil ion dol ars for each idea. The other extreme would be to
award each employee a penny. The combination of the two extremes inspires a “Penny for Your
Ideas” campaign. Buy a gum-bal machine and place it in your of ce l ed with colored gum bal
s. For every idea (or every ve or ten ideas) award the contributor a penny for use in the
machine. Award a cash prize according to the color of the gumbal that comes out ($2 for green,
$5 for yel ow, $100 for red, etc.)
Combine Multiple Perspectives
Genius comes from a passionate commitment to the integration of multiple perspectives. When
one excels in several different areas and then is able to synthesize them, one begins to approach
genius. Through the integration of multiple perspectives, the deeper structures of ideas become
revealed to us. The discovery of the deep structure beneath the many and varied surface
structures is the core criterion of genius.
SIL
SIL is a German acronym which means “successive integration of problem elements.” SIL is
another of the many brainwriting techniques that were developed at the Batel e Institute in
Frankfurt, Germany. It rst involves silent individual generation of ideas about a previously
stated problem.

Making Novel Combinations T -

It differs

from most other methods in that ideas are generated by progressively integrating previous ideas.
The guidelines are:
1. Each individual in the group silently writes ideas.
2. Two of the group members read one of their ideas out loud.
3. The remaining group members try to integrate the two ideas into one idea.
4. A third member reads an idea and the group attempts to integrate it with the one formed in step
three.
5. This process of reading and integrating ideas continues until al the ideas have been read and
integrated into one nal solution. While it may not be possible to integrate al ideas, at least it
ensures that al ideas get a fair hearing.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

The Exquisite Corpse

This is a technique used by surrealist artists to create conceptual combinations in art. Artists in a
group would take turns, each contributing any word that occurred to them in a “sentence,”
without seeing what the others had written. The resulting sentence would eventual y become a
combination of concepts that they would study and interpret, hoping to get a novel insight or a
glimpse of some deeper meaning. It was thought that the juxtaposed words of individuals would
approach the freedom of thought consciousness constrains. The technique is named “The
Exquisite Corpse” after a sentence that happened to contain those words.

Making Novel Combinations T -

Fol

owing is a group game based on this technique; it is designed to procure and combine unrelated
concepts. The group discusses a problem or subject for ve to ten minutes. Then, each
participant silently writes one word on a card. The group then tries to combine the cards into a
sentence (words can be added by the group to help the sentence make sense). Lastly, the group is
invited to study the nal sentence and build an idea or ideas from it.
Combine Talent
Look for ways to combine talent. Howard Gardner hypothesized in his book Creating Minds
that, without the stimulation and critique offered by close friends, Einstein might not have
completed his innovative work. He appreciated the opportunity to try out his ideas on others such
as his wife Mileva and Michaelangelo Besso, an engineer he befriended at the patent of ce.
Einstein thanked Besso explicitly for a conversation that led to the special theory of relativity,
and scholars have speculated that Mileva may have aided in the development of his most original
ideas. In his passionate letters to her, Einstein spoke of “our theory.” Einstein’s
friends and wife helped stimulate his thinking by offering diverse viewpoints and critiques.
Look for ways to maximize the many different and diverse talents in group brainstorming
sessions. You could divide the group into smal er groups by gender, work experience,
departments, geographical regions, education, and so on. Have each group brainstorm for ideas
and then combine the groups to share ideas and to look for ways to combine them. For example,
you might divide a large group into three groups: very experienced, moderately experienced, and
little or no experience. Or divide a group by position, for example, salespeople, customer service
representatives, and service personnel. Have each group separately generate ideas and then
combine the groups to successively integrate the ideas using the SIL guidelines on this page.

Left-Brainers and Right-Brainers

Making Novel Combinations T -

An

fi

fi

fi

interesting way to combine talent is to divide the group into left-brain (rational) thinkers and
right-brain (intuitive) thinkers. Ask the left-brainers to come up with practical, conventional, and
logical ideas; ask the right-brainers to come up with far-out, unconventional, and il ogical ideas.

Using the SIL guidelines, have the group successively integrate the logical ideas with the
unconventional.
Combining Domains
Many breakthroughs are based on combining information from different domains that are usual y
not thought of as related. Integration, synthesis both across and within domains, is the norm
rather than the exception.
Ravi Shankar found ways to integrate and harmonize the music of India and Europe; Paul Klee
combined the in uences of cubism, children’s drawings, and primitive art to fashion his own
unique artistic style; Salvador Dali integrated Einstein’s theory of relativity into his masterpiece
Nature Morte Vivante, which artistical y depicts several different objects simultaneously in
motion and rest. And almost al scientists cross and recross the boundaries of physics, chemistry,
and biology in the work that turns out to be their most creative.
Another way to combine talent is to elicit advice and information about your subject from people
who work in different domains. Interestingly, Leonardo da Vinci met and worked with Niccolò
Machiavel i, the Italian political theorist, in Florence in 1503. The two men worked on several
projects together, including a novel weapon of war: the diversion of a river.

Making Novel Combinations T -

- Look for

ways to elicit ideas from people in other elds. Ask three to ve people who work in other
departments or professions for their ideas about your problem. Ask your dentist, your accountant,
your mechanic, etc. Describe the problem and ask how they would solve it. Listen intently and
write down the ideas before you forget them. Then, at a later time, try integrating al or parts of
their ideas into your idea.
This is what Robert Bunsen, the chemist who invented the familiar Bunsen burner, did with his
problem. He used the color of a chemical sample in a gas ame for a rough determination of the
elements it contained. He was puzzled by the many shortcomings of the technique that he and his
col eagues were unable to overcome, despite their vast knowledge of chemistry. Final y, he
casual y described the problem to a friend, Kirchhoff, a physicist, who immediately suggested
using a prism to display the entire spectrum and thus get detailed information. This suggestion
was the breakthrough that led to the science of spectrography and later to the modern science of
cosmology.

Making Novel Combinations T -

- If you’re

fi

fl

fi

fl

brainstorming a business problem in a group, try asking another department to join yours. For
example, if you are in advertising and want to create a new product advertising campaign, ask
people from manufacturing to join your session. Separate the advertising and manufacturing
people into two groups. Each group brainstorms for ideas separately. Then combine the groups
and integrate the ideas.

Physicists in a university assembled a huge magnet for a research project. The magnet was
highly polished because of the required accuracy of the experiment. Accidental y, the magnet
attracted some iron powder that the physicists were unable to remove without damaging the
magnet in some way. They asked other teachers in an interdepartmental meeting for their ideas
and suggestions. An art instructor came up with the solution immediately, which was to use
modeling clay to remove the powder.
STRATEGY FIVE: CONNECTING THE UNCONNECTED
If one particular thinking strategy stands out for creative geniuses, it is the ability to make
juxtapositions that elude most people. Cal it a facility to connect the unconnected that enables
them to see relationships to which others are blind. They set their imaginations in motion by
using unrelated stimuli and forcing connections with their subject.
You can change your thinking patterns by connecting your subject with something that is not
related. These different patterns catch your brain’s processing by surprise and wil change your
perception of your subject. Suppose you want a new way to display expiration dates on packages
of perishable food and you randomly pair this with autumn. Leaves change color in the autumn.
Forcing a connection between
“changing colors” with expiration dates triggers the idea of “smart labels” that change color
when the food is exposed to unrefrigerated temperatures for too long. The label would signal the
consumer-even though a calendar expiration date might be months away. Our notion of
“expiration” dates was changed by making a connection with something that was unrelated
(autumn), which triggered a new thought pattern and a new idea.
Leonardo da Vinci Suggested that you wil nd inspiration for marvelous ideas if you look into
the stains of wal s, ashes of a re, the shape of clouds, patterns in mud, or in similar places. He
would imagine seeing trees, battles, landscapes, gures with lively movements, etc., and then
excite his mind by forcing connections between the subjects and events he imagined and his
subject. According to his notebooks, da Vinci would even sometimes throw a paint- l ed sponge
against the wal and contemplate the stains.
Once he was standing by a wel and noticed a stone that hit the water at the same moment that a
bel went off in a nearby church tower. He noticed the stone caused circles that spread until they
disappeared. By simultaneously concentrating on the circles in the water and the sound of the bel
, he made the connection that led to his discovery that sound travels in “waves.” This kind of
tremendous insight could only happen through a connection between sight and sound made by
the imagination.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Leonardo da Vinci discovered that the human brain cannot deliberately concentrate on two
separate objects or ideas, no matter how dissimilar, without eventual y forming a connection
between them. No two inputs can remain separate in your mind, no matter how remote they are
from each other.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T

- Obviously, a tethered bal on a long

string is able to move in many different directions, but it cannot get away from the pole. If you
whack at it long enough, eventual y you wil wind the cord around the pole. This is a closed
system. Like the tetherbal , if you focus on two subjects for a period of time, you wil see
relationships and connections that wil trigger new ideas and thoughts that you cannot get using
your usual way of thinking.
Thinking Unpredictably
In the fol owing il ustration, two gures (A) are given to someone with the instructions to
arrange them into a recognizable shape that can be described to someone who cannot see the
shapes. The gures are usual y arranged into a rectangle (B). Then another gure (C) is added
and the task is to arrange al three gures into a recognizable shape. The result is almost always
another rectangle (D).

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

The rst pattern makes the second rectangle almost inevitable. We’ve activated the rectangle
pattern, which dominates our thinking and produces another predictable rectangle when given a
new piece of information. A square pattern (see A below) is just as good an arrangement, yet few
people see it until it’s pointed out. This example il ustrates how our conventional thinking
patterns dominate our thinking and block out new ideas and creativity.

It is impossible to think unpredictably by looking harder and longer in the same direction.
Change your focus and think about something that is not related, different, unusual patterns are
activated. If one of these newer patterns relates to one of the rst patterns, a connection wil be
made. This connection wil lead to the discovery of an original idea or thought, what some people
cal “divine” inspiration.
Einstein learned how to stimulate “blind variation” in his creative ideas by al owing his
imagination to play freely and generate new connections and combinations of associations. His
genius was the ability to voluntarily reproduce images and elements of thought at wil and to
explore relevant connections between those images and elements of thought and his subject.
Einstein’s genius had more to do with how he processed information than with the amount of
knowledge that he had.
A major characteristic of creative genius is the ability to generate a host of associations and
connections between dissimilar subjects.
Techniques

fi

fi

Fol owing are a series of techniques that incorporate the thinking strategy of “connecting the
unconnected” to generate novel and unpredictable ideas. The techniques provide a means of
producing blind variation of ideas through the use of unrelated stimuli, such as random words,
random objects, pictures, magazines and newspapers, colors, wishes, and fantasies

fi

fi

You can change your patterns by changing your focus and thinking about something that is not
related. For example, two additional gures (C) are added. Taking (B) apart and integrating the
gures in (C) gives us the arrangement in (D). The addition of something (C) that was not related
to the original problem activated different thinking patterns and inspired us to think of squares
(D). We can now go back and arrange the original gures (B) into a square (A). It is the same
with creative thinking. To get original ideas, you need to look at your subject in an unpredictable
way.

This technique provides a means of producing blind variation of ideas through the use of random
words to produce a rich variety of unpredictable ideas. Imagine dropping a stone in a pond. You
see a wave emanate outward in a plane. The stone jostles the water molecules, which, in turn,
jostle neighboring water molecules. Thus, waves of relayed jostling molecules are propagated by
the action of the stone. Yet the waves are essences of neither the stone nor the water. Each wave
is distinct and measurable and has its own integrity as it visibly grows and travels outward. The
consequence is a new pattern of events that has a life of its own, independent of the stone that
initiated the action. By dropping a stone into the pond, you created something that did not exist
before: a wave.
In the same way, in order to get original ideas, you need a way to create new sets of patterns in
your mind. You need one pattern reacting with another set of patterns to create a new pattern.
The “random word” technique generates an almost in nite source of new patterns to react with
the patterns in your mind. Random
words provide rich sources of connection-making material. They are like pebbles being dropped
in a pond. They stimulate waves of associations and connections, some of which may help you to
a breakthrough idea.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

There are several ways to select a

random word:
Random Words List (on this page). You can close your eyes and randomly put your nger on
one of the groups of words (each group contains ve words) titled “Random Words” that fol ow
this section. The words in “Random Words” are connection-rich. Each word wil trigger other
words and images that are linked to the “special” word. What you should not do is read the list
and select the most likely one for your purposes.
Random Draw. Cut up the “Random Words” list into fragments and throw them into a shbowl
or box. Add your own words to the col ection. Draw out random words whenever you use this
technique.
Dictionary. You can retrieve random words from a dictionary by opening it, by chance, at any
page, closing your eyes, and randomly putting your nger on a word. Another way is to think of
a page number (page 22) and then think of a position of the word on that page (say the tenth
word down). Open the dictionary to page 22 and proceed to the tenth word down. If the word is
not a noun, continue down the list until you reach the rst noun.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Other resources. You can use any other resource (magazine, newspapers, books, telephone yel
ow pages, etc.). Close your eyes and stab your nger at a page. Take the noun closest to your
nger.

fi

fi

Random Words

Now, how would we use random words to generate ideas? Suppose our chal enge is to improve
the automobile. The group of random words we blindly drew from the “Random Words” list are
nose
Apol o 13
soap
dice
electrical outlet
1. List characteristics. Work with one word at a time. Draw a picture of the word to involve the
right hemisphere of your brain and then list the characteristics of the words. Think of a variety of
things that are associated with your word and list them.
For example, a nose has some of the fol owing characteristics: • Different shapes and sizes
• Sometimes decorated with pins and jewels
• Has two nostrils
• Can be repaired easily if broken
• Hair inside
• Decays with death
2 . Force connections. Make a forced connection between each characteristic and the chal enge
you are working on. In forcing connections between remote subjects, metaphorical-analogical
thinking opens up new pathways of creative thinking. Ask questions such as
• How is this like my problem?
• What if my problem were a ...?
• What are the similarities?
• ... is like the solution to my problem because ...?
• How is ... like an idea that might solve my problem?
Example: Connecting “A nose has two nostrils” with “improving the car” triggers the idea of
building a car with two separate power sources: a car with battery or electric power for city
driving and liquid fuel for long distances.
3 . What is its essence? What is the principle or essence of your random word? Can you build an
idea around it? For example, the essence of a nose might be “smel .” Forcing a connection
between “smel ” and “improving the automobile” inspires the idea of incorporating a cartridge in

the auto during manufacturing that warns the driver of malfunctions with various odors. If you
smel orange blossoms, for example, it’s time to have your brakes checked, or if you smel
cinnamon, you might have a gasoline leak, and so on.
For each random word, list the principle or essence, characteristics, features, and aspects, and
force connections with the chal enge.
Another example is derived from the random words “Apollo 13.” Astronauts used the LEM as
an emergency alternative power source in Apollo 13 in order to return to earth. Connecting this
thought with the automobile led to the redesign of the automobile engine so that it can be used as
an emergency power generator for the house during power failures. You could plug the house
into the car.
4. Create many connections. When using the “Random Words” list, use al ve words in the
group and force as many connections as possible. Al ow yourself ve minutes for each word
when you try it. Five minutes should be ample time to stimulate ideas. You should nd that long
after the xed time period of ve minutes, further connections and ideas are stil occurring.
One of the hal marks of geniuses is that they consciously form many connections and
associations between dissimilar subjects.
George de Mestral was not the rst to notice how cockleburs stick to clothes, but he was the one
who made the connection between cockleburs and fasteners and invented Velcro.
The more connections you make, the more likely the chance of an original idea. Consider
someone who can attend to two subjects— A and B—

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

at the same time. That person has a chance of thinking of a creative connection AB. A person
who attends to three subjects— A, B and C—has three potential connections: AB, AC, and BC.
Someone who attends to four subjects has six possible creative connections. Such a person
should be six times more likely to think of a creative idea than the person who attends to two and
so on.

Just as water ows down slopes, settles in hol ows, and is con ned to riverbeds, so information
ows down your usual thinking channels, and by its very ow, increases the probability of
triggering the same old ideas. If you deliberately dam up the old channels, you force the
information to seek out and take to new and better patterns of ow. Another way to dam up the
old channels and cut new ones in your mind is to make connections between your subject and
random objects.
This is what happened to NASA engineer James Crocker when the Hubble telescope failed and
embarrassed NASA. In the shower of a German hotel room, James Crocker was contemplating
the Hubble disaster while showering and looking at the showerhead, which could be extended to
adjust to the user’s height. He made the connection between the showerhead and the Hubble
problem and invented the idea of placing corrective mirrors on automated arms that could reach
inside the telescope and adjust to the correct position. His idea turned the Hubble from a disaster
into a NASA triumph.

T-

Fol owing are guidelines for making connections with random objects:

fl

fi

fl

fi

1. Generate a list of ve objects that are unrelated to the problem. Imagine you are in the
Smithsonian Institute, a science museum, a natural history museum, the White House, France, an
airplane, or some other interesting location. List objects or things that interest you.

fl

fl

Random Objects

2. Select the rst object and describe what comes to mind. Write just a word or phrase. Draw a
picture to get your right brain involved.
3. Study it and list al of its descriptive characteristics (speci c parts, relationships, what it does,
its essence, etc.).
4. Examine each characteristic and use it as a stimulus for suggesting ideas by forcing
connections between the characteristics and your chal enge. 5. Continue this process with al the
characteristics for the object.
6. Test different ways to connect characteristics and your problem.
7. Select another object and repeat the process.
8. Examine al the ideas and select the most promising.
Thought Walk
During his long hikes in the mountains of Berchtesgaden, Sigmund Freud worked out his
imposing structure of the unconscious, preconscious, and conscious that has bound the twentiethcentury psyche ever since.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

Taking a walk stimulated and

refreshed these men in their thinking.
Instead of imagining objects, take a walk around your home or workplace and the surrounding
grounds. Come back with four or ve things or objects (or a list of objects) that interested you
during your walk. (For example, children skipping rope, a pebble, a bag of jel y beans, a drinking
fountain, and so on.) Study the objects and list their characteristics. Then brainstorm for ideas
using the procedures outlined previously in “Random Objects.”
If you are brainstorming in a group, ask each person to take a “thought walk” and come back
with four or ve things or objects (or a list). Ask each participant to silently list the
characteristics and to build ideas around the characteristics. The group shares ideas and then
elaborates on them into stil more ideas.
A few months back, a group of engineers were looking for ways to safely and ef ciently remove
ice from power lines during ice storms, but they were stonewal ed. They decided to take a
“thought walk” around the hotel. One of the engineers came back with a jar of honey he
purchased in the gift shop. He suggested putting honey pots on top of each power pole. He said
this would attract bears. The bears would climb the poles to get the honey, and their climbing
would cause the poles to sway and the ice to vibrate off the wires. Working with the principle of
vibration, they got the idea of bringing in helicopters to hover over the lines. Their hovering
vibrated the ice off the power lines.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Newspapers and Magazines

Newspapers and magazines are excel ent sources for random stimuli that can be used to initiate
new ideas. Pick up your favorite newspaper or magazine and open to one of the fol owing
sections:
• Classi eds • Front page • Editorials • Sports
• Comics • Business • Arts
• Fashion
Put the problem aside and forget the problem while you browse through the newspaper or
magazine. List phrases, pictures, or other things that catch your eye but have nothing to do with
the problem. Select another section. Keep browsing and listing until you have a list of ve to ten
interesting items. Connect your problem with something from your list to get new ideas.
Randomly pick up a magazine and select and read one article, no matter how remote the article is
from your chal enge. Then force connections and links between the subject matter in the article
and your chal enge by thinking metaphorical y. Ask yourself, “What are the similarities between
this article and my problem? What connections can I make? What new questions does it inspire?
What in this article is like a solution to my problem?”
An engineer needed to place a large generator into an excavated area. The usual way to do this
was with a heavy crane, which costs $5,000 to lease. He brainstormed for alternative ways to
move the generator in the hope of saving the money. Lea ng through a travel magazine, he read
about Eskimos and the construction of igloos. He connected the article to his problem and came
up with an ingenious solution. He trucked in blocks of ice and placed the ice in the excavated
area. Next, he pushed the generator onto the ice and placed the generator over the location for it.
When the ice melted, the generator settled perfectly into the location. The chances of picking up
the magazine and lea ng to the Eskimo article is a little like playing roulette, the ultimate game
of chance.
Imagine that you are invited to play roulette with someone else’s money. You can keep your
winnings but your losses are paid for you. It’s a game of chance you cannot lose. You can never
be sure of winning on any particular bet, but you know that if you played long enough you would
win, sooner or later. Chances are, you would play as often as possible despite the unpredictability
of the game. You would play as often as you could, in order to increase your chance of winning.
Using this model, it is possible to see what can be done about randomly connecting unrelated
subjects in thinking. The rst step is to be aware that there is the possibility of this thinking
strategy. The second step is to learn how to do it. The third step is to use this strategy as often as
you can and to get rid of any inhibitions that interfere with your using it. The more times you use
it and the more different ways you use it, the more you increase your chances of coming up with
original ideas and creative solutions to problems.
You Can Connect Anything

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Psychologists have found that if you put people in a room with a contraption of lightbulbs wired
to blink on and off at random, they wil quickly discern what they believe are patterns, theories

Try an experiment. Pick eight random words and give the list to someone or to a smal group (for
example: “ owerpot,” “baby,” “glass,”
“grasshopper,” “coffeepot,” “box,” “toast,” and “garage”). Ask them to divide the words into two
groups without giving them any rationale for the division. You’l
discover that people wil come up with some very creative classi cations. They’l group them
according to “words with the letter o,”
“things that touch water,” “objects made in factories,” and so on. No one ever says there is no
connection. They invent one. Our minds are incredible connection- making and connectionrecognizing machines.
Max Ernst the surrealist artist became fascinated with the random patterns he saw in wooden
oors He developed a technique where he would place paper on the wood and rub it with
graphite to make a tracing that he would sometimes embel ish with painting. His technique of
turning random patterns of wood into art inspired other surrealist painters to work with other
natural patterns and transform them into meaningful pieces of art.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

Freud’s act when his father died

inspired a whole new line of thinking that led to one of his famous theories. His imagination al
owed him to force a connection between the act of closing eyes and psychoanalytic theory. If you
declare that you are going to pay attention to some random stimuli, you can force connections
between anything and your subject. You could select a color, blue, for example, and then walk
around and list al the blue things you see for the next few minutes (sky, wal , telephone, pen,
shirt, and so on). Then list characteristics and force connections. Or you may select a shape, for
example, a circle, and focus on circular things that you see. Or you could make connections
between your ve senses and your subject.
Five Senses

fi

fi

fi

Psychologists have long sensed an association between the senses and creativity. Artists and
poets, in particular, have taken the unity of senses for granted. Think of any poem, and you’l
discover that the metaphoric stimulation of one sense elicits a certain response. A description of a
sound, for example, might elicit a certain emotion that gives the poem meaning. After generating
ideas, try using the ve senses to generate new possibilities. Concentrating on our senses takes us
from our main track of thinking and deposits us on side tracks. These side tracks sometimes lead
to original thoughts and ideas. The guidelines for this exercise are

fl

fl

for predicting which bulb wil be next to blink. We invent elaborate architectures in our minds to
invent patterns to make connections.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

1. Write down the ve senses: sight,

smel , taste, touch, and hearing.
2. Select one of your ideas and force a connection between the idea with each of the ve senses.
Suppose you are trying to reduce employee turnover and one of your ideas is that employees
should have more involvement with their jobs. Apply the ve senses to the idea to extend your
thinking. For example:
Sight. Initiate more activity. Get people meeting in smal groups. Have open doors, open areas for
interaction. Use brightly colored bul etin boards and other information exchange facilitators.
Hearing. Pipe in classical music. Hang a large bel outside the boss’s door. Whenever something
is accomplished or a company goal is reached, the boss rings the bel .
Smell. Provide snacks, such as popcorn, that have enticing odors to invite interaction in a
gathering place.
Taste. Provide occasional pizza and potluck lunches where people meet and talk shop and
develop relationships. Have managers make custom hot fudge sundaes
every Friday for employees to celebrate the week.
Touch. Provide clean, inviting surroundings with soft, comfortable areas and sound-absorbent
dividers.
Visuals
Applying your senses to your subject gets you thinking about the problem in different
dimensions.
Consider the sense of sight. Pictures, photographs and il ustrations are excel ent sources of
unrelated stimuli. Years back, a designer, working to invent a new light xture, leafed through an
issue of National Geographic and got his inspiration for a new idea from a picture of a monkey.
He imagined a monkey running around a home with a light wherever it was needed. This image
led to the invention of track lighting. Use images to help with your problems:

T-

1. Browse through newspapers and magazines. Select two or three interesting pictures at

random.

fi

fi

fi

fi

2. Describe one of the pictures in detail. List descriptors. Include physical references and actionoriented statements. List everything that comes to mind (imagery, feelings, words, phrases, etc.).
If you think of absurd material, list that too.

fi

3. Force connections between each descriptor and your chal enge. 4. List your ideas.
The CEO of a Japanese perfume company asked his executives for ideas that would enable the
company to survive poor economic times.
Disappointed with their suggestions, he gave each of them a picture of a king crab and instructed
them to study it and to look for ideas from the crab they could apply to their business. Some of
their connections and ideas were
“A crab can rejuvenate lost claws. We must develop back-up product lines in case our primary
line falters.”
“A crab can see 360 degrees. We must improve our market intel igence.”
“A crab moves slowly. We cannot afford this. We must downsize so we can react more speedily
to the market.”
“A crab has distinct features. We need to develop a distinctive package that differentiates our
perfume more clearly.”
“A crab is a scavenger. We need to al ocate resources to see what other uses and markets we can
nd for our products.”

Picture Portfolios
Use picture portfolios to stimulate discussion and ideas in group brainstorming sessions. Fol
owing are guidelines:

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T and ask the group to verbal y brainstorm solutions.

1. Read a problem statement aloud

2. Give each group member a folder containing eight to ten pictures that are not related to the
problem area.
3. Instruct the group members to examine each picture and silently write down any new ideas or
modi cations of previous ideas suggested by the pictures. 4. After a designated period, ask the
group members to read their ideas aloud.
5. As each idea is read, ask the group members to discuss it and try to develop new ideas or
modi cations. Record al new ideas as they are suggested.
6. Col ect and evaluate.
An interesting twist is to provide participants with instant- lm cameras and ask them to take a
strol and photograph interesting objects and scenes. Use the photos as prompts. A group of
managers from various departments met to seek better ways to mesh functions. One of their
photographs showed birds looking at a pond of gold sh. To some it seemed that the birds were
trying to communicate with the sh who could not hear them. As they discussed the photo, they
realized they saw themselves as the unheard birds. Marketers felt that the researchers were
preoccupied with scienti c rather than commercial matters while the researchers felt that
marketing was deaf to new technical insights. The teams of marketers and researchers now meet
quarterly to learn “how to talk to each other.”
Children’s Drawings
The great landscape artist J. M. W. Turner used an unusual technique to stimulate his
imagination. Whenever he visited friends who had young children, he would give the children
watercolors and paper to make drawings. Sometimes he would suggest a general theme, and
other times he would let them draw anything they wanted. The results were original and
spontaneous expressions of primary consciousness. Turner would then take the drawings,
observe them with an open mind, and create his own visual impressions from the children’s
work, in much the same way Leonardo da Vinci imagined faces and scenes among stains on the
wal . Turner would use these visual impressions to inspire his imagination to create new
perspectives for the familiar landscape.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

If you or your friends have young

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

children, try Turner’s technique. Provide them drawing materials and ask them to make
drawings. You could suggest a general theme. For example, if your problem is how to organize
your company more effectively, you might suggest that they make drawings of people at work;
or if you’re worried about your job security, ask them to make drawings of people in danger. Or
let them draw anything they want. Take the drawings and observe the images, patterns, and
colors with an open mind. Then force connections between the images and your subject.

The Dreamer, the Realist, and the Critic
Imagine a creature living on another planet with a different atmosphere in a distant solar system.
Take a moment and draw a picture of the creature that you imagine.
Most people draw creatures that resemble life as we understand it, even though we’re free to
think up anything. Namely, creatures with sense organs to see, hear, and smel , and arms and legs
with bilateral symmetry. Rather than creating something that’s idiosyncratic and unpredictable,
most people create creatures that have a great deal in common with one another and with the
properties of typical earth animals.
There is no reason why animals on other planets would have to resemble animals on earth.
People drawing space creatures could have tapped into any existing knowledge base, such as
rock formations, tumbleweed, or clouds, to get an idea for the general shape of their space
creature, and each person could access something different and novel. But most people draw
animals that have similar properties to animals on earth.
What we’re exhibiting is a phenomenon cal ed structured imagination. Structured imagination
refers to the fact that even when we use our imagination to develop new ideas, those ideas are
heavily structured in highly predictable ways according to existing concepts, categories, and
stereotypes.
Research shows that we cal up typical instances of a concept faster than less typical ones. To see
this for yourself, quickly name the rst ve birds you can think of. Your list is likely to be
populated with very typical birds, such as robins, bluejays, and sparrows, and less likely to
contain unusual birds, such as pelicans, ostriches, and penguins.
And because the most typical members of a concept are the ones that have al of its central
properties, this can reduce innovation even further. For instance, robins y, lay eggs, and build
their nests in trees, but penguins do not. If you base a novel alien on the more typical robin, it wil
resemble a stereotyped bird more than if you base it on a penguin.
We need ways to open and expand our minds to explore the outer limits and dazzling variety of
our concepts and concoct ideas that are wonderful y unusual.

fl

fi

fi

One approach is a creative-thinking technique used by Walt Disney that al owed his vivid
imagination to explore extraordinary ideas and concepts.

This approach al owed him to produce fantastical ideas, uncritical y and unrestrained. Later, he
would engineer these fantasies into feasible ideas and then evaluate them. He would shift his
perspective three times by playing three separate and distinct roles: the dreamer, the realist, and
the critic.
On the rst day, he would play the dreamer and dream up fantasies and wishful visions. He
would let his imagination soar, without worrying about how to implement his conceptions. His
fantasy analogies permitted him to connect words, concepts, and ideas with apparently irrelevant
objects and events. The result was a rich treasure of associations, an imagination avalanche with
whole mountains of ideas crashing down.
The next day, he would try to engineer his fantasies back to earth by playing the realist. As a
realist, he would look for ways to work his conceptions into something workable and practical.
Final y, on the last day, he would play the part of the critic and poke holes in his ideas. Is it
feasible? Can you translate the idea’s features into customer bene ts? If so, can you make money
with it?

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

Play the dreamer, realist, and critic

using the fol owing guidelines:
1. You are the Dreamer. Imagine you have a magic wand that wil grant you any wish you desire.
What wishes would you create to solve your problem? List at least three to ve, especial y things
that normal y wouldn’t be possible. Try to make each wish more improbable than the last.
Example: A community wants to raise more money by more ef cient policing of parking meters.
My wishes are
• I wish we had an honor code. Everyone keeps track of their parking time and sends the money
to the police department once a month.
• I wish police of cers could see cars leave parking spots so others would not be able to pirate
unexpired time on the meter.
• I wish cars “vaporized” when time expired on the meter.
2. Select one of the wishes.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Example: I wish police of cers could see cars leave parking spots so others would not be able to
pirate unexpired time on the meter.

3. Realist. Play the realist by working the wish into a practical idea. What is the principal feature
of the wish? What features about the wish appeal to you? Extract a principle, feature, or some
aspect of the wish.
Examples of features and aspects of the wish:
• The principle is “seeing.”
• Others won’t be able to pirate “unexpired time.”
• We wil provide new jobs. We have to hire more parking of cers to watch the meters.
• This system would modify behavior. Motorists would no longer spend time looking for
unexpired meters.
4. Extract one principle or aspect and try to engineer it into a practical idea.
Example: “Seeing.” How can you work “seeing” into an idea that wil lead to the more ef cient
policing of parking meters?
Imagineered Idea: Manufacture a parking meter with infrared sensors and lithium-powered
computer chips to “see” parking spaces. When a car leaves, the remaining time on the meter is
erased.
5. You are the Critic. Play the part of the critic by poking holes in the idea.
Example: The “seeing” meter is technological y possible. The major drawback is cost, as such a
meter wil cost at least four times the cost of a normal meter. The cost, however, wil be more than
offset by the more ef cient col ection of revenues.
You can now go back and engineer other features of the same wish into workable ideas or go
back and work with one of the other wishes. Generate as many workable ideas as you can from
the wishes.
Wishes
There is a clear relationship between wishful thinking and creativity. You are more likely to have
a creative idea when you are wishing than when your thinking is extremely intel ectual.

fi

fi

fi

Wishes help us deliberately oversimplify. This tactic has a long and distinguished history in
science and the arts. Scientists play fast and loose with recalcitrant details. Newtonian physics
was overthrown by Einstein, but it is stil a good approximation for almost al purposes. No
physicist objects when NASA uses Newtonian physics to calculate the forces at liftoff and the
orbital trajectory of the space shuttle, but strictly speaking, this is a deliberate use of a false
theory in order to make calculations possible. Fol owing are guidelines for a group brainstorming
session using wishes:

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

1. The group leader writes the topic

on a card or Post-it note and posts it on the wal or chalkboard.
2. Ask participants to imagine they have a magic wand. The wand wil grant them any wish they
desire. What wishes do they have about the subject, especial y things that would not normal y be
possible? Participants silently list wishes for two or three minutes.
3. Participants select one wish and write it on a card or Post-it note.
4. The wish cards are col ected and posted around the topic card. The group leader organizes the
cards and places related ones together.
5. Select one wish. Select the wish that’s most interesting to the group.
Example: Automobile windshields must be constantly cleared when there is any bad weather at
al (rain, sleet, snow, ice, frost, dirt, etc.).
Wipers and washer uid help some, but grime rarely can be eliminated completely. A group of
engineers brainstormed for ways to improve the windshield. The wish they decided to work with
was, What if a windshield could clean itself?
6. The group brainstorms for ways to make the wish a reality. How can you approximate the wish
by achieving something similar to the desired effect? Ask what speci c features or aspects of the
wish appeal to the group. Then try to gure out feasible changes or actions that embody these
speci c features. Ask “could we,” “how about,” and “what if” type questions.
Example: One of the engineers noted that camera lenses seem to be self-cleaning. Lenses are
coated with titanium dioxide. When the sun’s rays hit the coating, they set off a chemical
reaction that strips the lens of organic matter. The engineers decided to see if they could adopt
this process to the automobile windshield.
7. List and elaborate on the ideas.
Example: The engineers discovered that titanium dioxide could not be applied directly to
windshields because of sodium in the glass. They solved this by coating glass rst with acid to
purge the sodium and then applying the titanium dioxide. This process keeps the windshields
clean of everything but large bird droppings.
8. Select another wish. Select the wish that’s most unique to the group and go through the same
exercise.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

9. Continue working the wishes until the group has generated a suf cient number of ideas.

The more interesting and unique the wish, the greater the possibilities are for an original idea or
twist. A frozen- sh processor’s line of frozen sh tasted bland and boring. He tried everything,
including keeping the sh alive until the last moment. Food chemists told him the answer lies in
keeping the sh moving. However, the sh remained inactive no matter how, or how much, the
water was disturbed.
The owner waved his magic wand and wished he could “pluck” a sh out of the ocean at the last
moment and process it immediately. This wish inspired him to think of the natural habitat of sh,
which includes predators. This was the crucial connection—predators are the reason sh keep
moving around. He thought, “Why not put predators in the holding tanks with the sh?” The sh
kept moving to escape the predators and retained vitality and avor. Of course, some sh failed
to escape and were lost, but this was a smal price to pay for tasty frozen sh.
Paper Airplanes
When you are actively engaged in solving a problem, your attention is narrowly focused and
your range of awareness is likely to be relatively constricted. Only a narrow range of information
is looked at and utilized at any one moment. Bringing information from outside sources may
provide hints and cues that expand your focus and may provide a vital link to a new perception
of the problem.
For example, in a recent workshop, participants were asked to tie together the free ends of two
strings that were suspended from the ceiling. The problem was that the two strings were hung so
far apart from each other that they could not be reached at the same time. The desired solution
involved recognizing that a pair of pliers laying in clear view could serve not only as a tool for
grasping but also as a pendulum bob. When tied to one of the strings, the pliers could be swung
toward the second string, thereby permitting a subject to hold onto the second string while
awaiting the arrival of the rst one. Most people had not solved the problem after ten minutes.
I subtly nudged one of the strings into lateral motion in front of the subjects, without saying
anything. After exposure to this clue, most solved the problem within sixty seconds. What was at
least as interesting, however, is that most of these subjects had no idea that the nudged-string
clue had anything to do with their solving the problem.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Consciousness has a limited-capacity mode of information processing because people can be
conscious of only a few things at once. So although the subjects may not have consciously
noticed the lateral movement of the string, they seemed nevertheless to have been tacitly
informed by it. In other words, people are able to respond productively to information that they
do not consciously notice or remember. They seem to be tacitly informed by hints and cues that
they may or may not remember.

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

An interesting way to provide cues to

participants in a group is to ask each participant to silently write down three to four ideas on a
sheet of paper about the subject being considered. Title the sheet “Ideas.” On a separate sheet,
ask participants to list their thoughts about the subject. Title the sheet “Cues.” Free associate and
list everything that comes to mind on the cue sheet, for example, the characteristics, components,
wishes about the problem, obstacles, absurd ideas, and so on. Use a stream-of-consciousness
technique and write or list everything that comes to mind.
Have everyone take the “Cues” sheet and construct a paper airplane out of it. At a given signal,
everyone ies their “Cues” airplanes to another part of the room. Everyone picks up someone
else’s airplane. Upon reading what’s been written on the airplane, he or she takes the new “cues”
and uses them to improve or elaborate on their original ideas.
Relational Words
There is an old experiment in the psychology of problem solving. Put some corn on the ground
and a sheet of glass in front of the corn. Put a hungry chicken in front of the glass, so that the
glass is between the chicken and the corn. The chicken wil try to go straight through the glass to
get to the corn. The chicken is not able to change its relationship to the corn and go around the
barrier. It’s wearing a relational blinder before its mind’s eye and only thinks of going straight.
Humans behave this way too. There is a traf c light near my home with a left-turn lane and a
straight-through lane. Every week night there is a long line of around twenty cars lined up in the
left-turn lane, waiting for the light to change, and none in the straight-through lane. And, every
night I drive straight through, go around the block, and wheel down the road before any of those
cars get past the stoplight. Like the chicken, they, also, are wearing relational blinders and can
only think of waiting in line to turn left, instead of going around the block.

fi

fl

CONNECTING THE
UNCONNECTED T -

The elementary statement “Take one

thing in some relation to another thing” is a form of sentence used to describe the statement of a
discovery, an invention, or an idea. Discovery and invention, it could be said, is nothing more
than putting a couple of old things together in a new relation.
Think of it as a mathematical equation with two elements of a problem on either side of a
relational word. You create an elementary action statement: “Take one thing—another thing.”
There are sixty basic English words that can t where the dash is and change the relationship of
elements. They are the sixty words below.

Blueprint
1. Break your problem apart into elements.
Example: A team of designers wanted to improve the refrigerator. Some of the elements of the
problem are “refrigerator,” “door,” “freezer,” “electrical power source,” “ice tray,” “food trays,”
“inside light,” “retaining cold air,” “aesthetics,” and “color.”
2. Select two major problem elements.
Example: “refrigerator,” “door.”

fi

3. Select a relational word and insert it between the two problem elements. Success in problem
solving comes from changing relationships between elements in a situation. Two parts of a
problem concept are “forced” together with one or more relational words to produce unusual
associations. The associations then are used to stimulate new ideas.

Example: Refrigerator “without” doors.
4. Examine the combination and write down any ideas suggested.
Example: This relationship (“without doors”) inspired the invention of a refrigerator without
doors. A cool-air “tornado” circulates through the interior, while vertical jets create a protective
curtain, which keeps warm air out. The refrigerator is circular in design and can be positioned
anywhere, including in the center of the kitchen.
5. Repeat steps 2 and 3. Keep shuf ing through different sets of relationships by changing
problem elements and relational words to come up with additional ideas.
Example: In our example, the designers continued looking for additional ideas. Shuf ing
through a set of relationships, they settled on
“refrigerator” beside “electrical power source,” which inspired them to design a smal battery
backup power source that kicks in should there be a brief power
failure.
STRATEGY SIX: LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
you can add in nitely more rationals like 3⁄4 or 118/119, plus in nitely more irrationals like the
square root of 2, and you’l never begin to populate the space. His work became known as the
principle of discontinuity.
“Discontinuity” quickly became a key theme of modernism and a new mode of thought in the
sciences, art, and invention. Physicist Ludwig Boltzmann soon demonstrated that continuity was
also a statistical il usion in physics, since the behavior of atoms is unpredictable. The French
painter Georges Seurat used this mode of thinking when he invented a new technique cal ed
pointil ism and created the rst modern painting, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of la Grande
Jatte, out of thousands of colored dots, each no larger than an eighth of an inch. This great
masterpiece contains some fty human gures, dogs, and a monkey, al reducible to little dabs of
pigment that somehow form a harmonious whole that radiates an extraordinary calm. Thomas
Edison invented the movie camera, which is another triumph of discontinuity: sixteen stil photos
per second that the eye interprets as movement.
Reversals

fl

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

Dedekind looked at the other side of continuity by reversing the way he thought about it and got
the bril iant insight that led to a new mode of thinking, discovery, and art. The il ustration below
is made up of irregular shapes that look like puzzle pieces without meaning. However, if you
focus on the background—the spaces between the shapes—the word “WEST” appears. If you
have trouble seeing it, place a straightedge on the top or bottom border of the gures to make the
word obvious.

This is what happens when you reverse your perspective and look at the other side of things.
Suppose you are elected to host a singles elimination tennis tournament. You have 117 entrants.
What is the minimum number of tennis matches that would have to be arranged for this number
of entrants?
When faced with this problem most people draw diagrams showing the actual pairings in each
match and the number of byes. Others try to work it out mathematical y. In fact the answer is 116
matches and one can work this out at once without any complicated diagrams or math. To work it
out, reverse your thinking from the winners of each match to the losers. Since there can only be
one winner in a singles elimination tennis tournament, there must be 116 losers. Each loser can
only lose once so there must be 116 matches.
The tendency in the tennis problem is to focus on the winners and not the losers.
Reversing your thinking leads you to consider the losers instead of the winners and the problem
is rapidly solved. Reversing the way you look at things encourages you to consider things that
may not be considered at al . During the Middle Ages, a
number of people in a French vil age were dying from the Black Plague. The other vil agers
discovered that they had buried some people who were stil alive by mistake. Their problem as
they framed it was how to make sure they did not bury people who were stil alive. One
imaginative soul solved the problem by reversing it. He proposed making sure people were dead
before they were buried by putting a stake in the cof n lid above the heart. Reversing their
problem reversed their viewpoint.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Reversals break your existing patterns of thought and provoke new ones. You take things as they
are and then turn them around, inside out, upside down, and back to front to see what happens. In
the il ustration, gure A shows two lines of equal length bounded by arrow-like angles. In gure
B, the arrow-like angles are reversed on one of the lines, which changes our perception and
creates the il usion of the line being shorter. It’s not shorter. Measure it and you wil nd it is stil
equal in length to the other lines. The lines haven’t changed, your perception of them has.

In gure A, the angles at the end of the lines seem to open up a potential y limited space.
Reversing the angle seems to close off and limit the area, which changes your perception of the
length of the lines.
A simple reversal of angles dramatical y changes what we see in the il ustration. The same
perceptual changes occur when we reverse our conventional thinking patterns about problems
and situations. When Henry Ford went into the automobile business, the conventional thinking
was that you had to “bring people to the work.” He reversed this to “bring the work to the
people” and invented the assembly line. When Al Sloan became CEO of General Motors, the
common assumption was that people had to pay for a car before they drove it. He reversed this to
“you can drive the car before you pay for it” and he pioneered the idea of instal ment buying.
Physicist and philosopher David Bohm believed geniuses were able to think different thoughts
because they could tolerate ambivalence between opposite or incompatible subjects. Thomas
Edison’s breakthrough invention of a practical system of lighting involved wiring his circuits in
paral el and of using high-resistance laments in his bulbs, two things that were considered
impossible by conventional thinkers, in fact, were not considered at al because of an assumed
incompatibility. Because Edison could tolerate the ambivalence between the two incompatible
things, he could see the relationship that led to his breakthrough.

fi

fi

In the il ustration below, you can perceive four black arrowheads on a white background, or you
can perceive four white arrowheads on a black background. You can choose to focus on the black
or on the opposite white arrowheads. Focusing on the black arouses the notion of the white and
vice versa. Similarly, any particular thought wil arouse the notion of its opposite by simply
adding “not” or by reversing it.

Mathematician-philosopher Bertrand Russel once astounded his col eagues by demonstrating
that, in mathematical argument, every alternative leads to its opposite. You can provoke new
ideas by considering the opposite of any subject or action. When bioengineers were looking for
ways to improve the tomato, they identi ed the gene in tomatoes that ripens tomatoes. They
thought that if the gene hastens ripening (black arrowhead), maybe they could use the gene to
slow down the process by reversing it (white arrowhead). They copied the gene, put it in
backwards, and now the gene slows down ripening, making vine-ripened tomatoes possible in
winter.
Reversing Assumptions

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
TSuppose you want to start a new restaurant and are having dif culty coming up with

ideas. To initiate ideas, try the fol owing reversals:
1. List al your assumptions about your subject.
Example: Some common assumptions about restaurants are A. Restaurants have menus, either
written, verbal or implied. B. Restaurants charge money for food.
C. Restaurants serve food.
2. Reverse each assumption. What is its opposite? Example: The assumptions reversed would be
A. Restaurants have no menus of any kind.
B Restaurants give food away for free
..
C. Restaurants do not serve food of any kind.
3. Ask yourself how to accomplish each reversal. How can we start a restaurant that has no menu
of any kind and stil have a viable business?

fi

fi

Example:

A. A restaurant with no menu. Idea: The chef informs each customer what he bought that day at
the meat market, vegetable market, and sh market. He asks the customers to select items that
appeal and he will create a dish with those items, speci cally for each customer.
B. A restaurant that gives away food. Idea: An outdoor cafe that charges for time instead of food.
Use a time stamp and charge so much for time (minutes) spent. Selected food items and
beverages are free or sold at cost.
C. A restaurant that does not serve food. Idea: Create a restaurant with a unique decor in an
exotic environment and rent the location. People bring their own food and beverages (picnic
baskets, etc.) and pay a service charge for the location.
4. Select one solution and build it into a realistic idea. In our example, we decide to work with
the “restaurant with no menu” reversal. We’l cal the restaurant “The Creative Chef.” The chef
wil create the dish out of the selected ingredients and name the dish after the customer. Each
customer wil receive a computer printout of the recipe the chef named after the customer.
Reversals destabilize your conventional thinking patterns and free information to come together
in provocative new ways. For example:
• Suppose you have a glass of mint julep. Reverse this to mint julep has you. How can we
accomplish this? Imagine yourself fal ing into a glass of mint julep. This triggers the thought of
inventing a shower attachment with different scents and perfumes.
• Drivers control the parking time of their cars. Reverse this to cars control parking time. This
triggers the idea of parking anywhere as long as you leave your lights on. This might be a good
idea for municipalities that have problems with people who park their cars on main streets for
long periods of time.
• Dentists have dental tools. Reverse this to dentists do not have dental tools. How can a dentist
do dental work without tools? This provokes the idea of patients buying their own tools, which
are stored by dentists in sterile compartments, to help prevent the spread of disease.
• A chair has height. Reverse this to a chair is at. This inspires the idea of a piece of thick
padding material that you could lay over something else to make it a chair—like a large rock or
downed tree. In effect, you could place the pad over anything in nature to make it a chair.
Suppose two boys of different ages and skil levels are playing badminton. The older boy is much
better than the younger one and wins every game. The younger boy is discouraged and refuses to
play. Since this spoiled the fun for the older boy, it posed the problem of how to keep the
younger boy playing. A conventional thinker would suggest offering the younger boy a handicap
or exhorting him to be a good loser. A thinker who tolerates ambivalence might see that
competition is the crux of the problem and would look for ideas that cooperation, the opposite of
competition, would arouse. One idea is to change the game into a cooperative game, with the
goal of seeing how long the two boys together could keep the bird going back and forth.

fi

fl

fi

Groups

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
T-

When working with a smal group, ask each participant to write his or her assumptions

about the subject in a numbered list. You can then
• Cal out an arbitrary number, say, number three. Each person must then reverse that assumption
on his or her list and gure out how to make the reversal into a viable idea.
• Ask each person to select one assumption and reverse it. • Ask each person to reverse al their
assumptions.
• Cut up the lists into slips of assumptions and put them into a paper bag. Draw one of the slips
and work together as a group to reverse it into something new. Keep drawing and reversing until
you get the ideas you want.
Reversals generate a lot of provocative ideas in a short period of time. In one example, a
manager for a major copier company reversed her company’s attitude toward the competition
from noncooperation to cooperation. The conventional thinking in the copier business is not to
cooperate with your competitor in any way. Consequently, her company refused to service the
competitors’ machines. She reversed this to a policy that publicly stated that the company would
not only service the competition’s machines, but would honor their service warranties as wel .
The policy was tremendously successful. It al owed the company to establish relationships with
the competitor’s customers that eventual y led to new sales.
Reversals give you two different ways of looking at something. Perhaps the clearest example of
the bene t to be derived from looking at things in two different ways is to be found in
mathematics. Any equation is no more than the putting down of two different ways of describing
something, yet the usefulness of describing a number in two ways instead of one is so great that
it is one of the cornerstones of mathematics. Having the two different ways of looking at
something on either side of the equals sign makes it possible to manipulate the whole thing into
an answer.
Reversing Perspective
Consider the classic teaser of the mirror: Why does a mirror seem to invert left and right but not
top and bottom? That is, why are the letters of a book backward when viewed in a mirror, but not
upside down, and why is your left hand the double’s right and your right the double’s left?
When we look into a mirror, we imagine ourselves turned left to right, as if we walked around a
pane of glass to look the other way. This conventional perspective is why we cannot explain what
is happening with a mirror To understand a mirror’s image you have to psychological y reverse
the way you perceive your image

fi

fi

Imagine your nose and the back of your head reversed: If your nose points north, your double’s
nose points south. The problem is on the axis running through the mirror. Stand in front of the

mirror with one hand pointing east and the other west. Wave the east hand. The mirror image
waves its east hand. Its west hand lies to
the west. Its head is up, and the feet are down. Once you look at a mirror with this perspective,
you gain an understanding about the axis of the mirror.

Psychological y reversing the way we perceive our image helps us understand a mirror. In the
same way, reversing your perspective about problems sometimes wil lead to a different insight or
a quicker, easier solution to a problem. Add up the numbers 1 to 100. The task is not dif cult, but
it takes time. Eventual y we arrive at 5,050 as the answer. Now imagine the numbers 1 to 100
written in a row. Reverse the numbers and write them beneath the rst row as fol ows:
1 2 3 4 5.............95 96 97 98 99 100
100 99 98 97 96.............6 5 4 3 2 1
Writing 1 to 100, you always increase by one. Reversing this to listing 100 to 1, you always
decrease by one. Adding up each pair of numbers always gives you 101. So the total is 100 × 101
= 10,100. We’ve used two sets of numbers, so divide by 2 to give 5,050. Reversing the numbers
al ows you to visualize the rows of numbers and to understand the sequence. You can then
multiply and divide in your head and arrive at the answer quickly, with little chance of error
compared to the conventional method of addition.

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
T

- Reversals can also help you nd the real causes of a problem that should be addressed. For

example, suppose your sales are down and you want to increase them. Here is how to reverse the
problem and identify the real causes for decreased sales: 1. State your chal enge.

fi

fi

fi

“In what ways might I increase sales?”
2. Reverse it.
“In what ways might I decrease sales?”
3. List al the ways you can think of to make the reversal work.
Example: Make fewer sales cal s, be rude to customers, no fol ow-up, poor product knowledge,

provide poor service, and so on. 4. Evaluate. Assign a numerical rating from one to ten for
everything on your list with ten being the most signi cant.
5. Focus on the highest rated items. These are the most probable causes of your problems.
Example: “Make fewer sales cal s” is the highest rated.
6. Reverse back to get a new perspective.
Example: “In what ways might I increase sales by making more sales cal s?”
Reversing the problem led us to the realization that the most effective way to increase our sales is
to make more sales cal s. Our real problem becomes to gure out
how to make more sales cal s.
Reverse Brainstorming
When brainstorming, a group of individuals generates as many ideas as possible without
judgment or criticism of any kind. The idea is to provide an environment that encourages
positive feedback. In science, “positive feedback” is not always a good thing. It wil actual y push
systems to explode or spiral out of control. Pointing a TV camera at its own monitor gives the
visual equivalent of the positive-feedback loop screech that comes from a microphone placed too
near its speaker.
This is why scientists discriminate between two different types of feedback. In science “negative
feedback” is the type that keeps things in check: The valve on Thomas Watt’s steam engine
created a negative-feedback loop because it opened when the engine was running fast in order to
release steam so the machinery wouldn’t explode or spiral out of control. In nature, negative
feedback in evolution keeps mutation changes from spiraling out of control by wiping out many
mutations to keep the design of species stable for long periods of time.
Reverse brainstorming is the critical evaluation or judgment of ideas, encouraging negative
feedback. It’s a particularly useful technique when a group is interested
in overcoming al possible weaknesses of a particular idea The goal is to identify weaknesses by
setting up teams to oppose the plan and then to brainstorm possible
in overcoming al possible weaknesses of a particular idea. The goal is to identify weaknesses by
setting up teams to oppose the plan, and then to brainstorm possible solutions. Suppose, for
example, your company has developed a new ve-year marketing plan for their cordless
telephone.

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
T-

fi

fi

fi

To begin the process of reverse brainstorming

1. Organize the group into teams. Each team is charged with acting as a particular competitor (or
you ask the teams to construct a mythical supercompetitor). Tel them that your company’s new
marketing plan has been leaked. To respond to this new threat, they (the competitors) are
instructed to come up with effective countermeasures to the plan.
2. Each group brainstorms for countermeasures to the plan.
3. Then the group is reassembled, and the competitor’s countermeasures are discussed. The
group is asked to respond to each countermeasure. Forcing people to reverse their thinking
creates new thinking patterns that lead to ideas that would not normal y be considered.
Reversal techniques create ambivalence, which is a fundamental but general y unrecognized
aspect of creative thought. Geniuses tolerate ambivalence: for instance, the polarity in Einstein’s
thinking. One moment he would favor continuity and the next moment he would favor
discontinuity. He could see the relationship between the two because he would tolerate the
opposite. Any continuous system can be thought of as made up of a large number of
discontinuous elements. Any discontinuous element is formed from a continuous background.
This ability to tolerate ambivalence gives geniuses insight into nuances that are usual y obscured
by conventional patterns of thought.
Seeing All Sides
Rothenberg found another il ustration of Janusian thinking in Niels Bohr’s thinking. Bohr
believed that if you hold opposites ideas together in your mind, then you suspend your thought
and your mind moves to a new level. The suspension of thought al ows an intel igence beyond
thought to act and create a new form. The swirling of opposites creates the conditions for a new
point of view to bubble free from your mind. This ability to hold two opposites together led to
Bohr’s conception of the principle of complementarity, the claim that light is both a particle and
a wave, which is apparently self-contradictory.

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
TTo think in terms of simultaneous opposites, convert your subject into a paradox and

then nd a useful analogy. Foundries clean forged metal parts by sandblasting them. The sand
cleans the parts but the sand gets into the cavities and is time-consuming and expensive to clean.
The paradox is that the particles must be “hard” in order to clean the parts and at the same time
“not hard” in order to be removed easily. An analogue of particles which are “hard” and “not
hard” is ice. One solution is to make the particles out of dry ice. The hard particles wil clean the
parts and later turn into gas and evaporate.

fi

fi

Suppose you wanted to make a lot of money. The opposite of this is that you might lack
ambition. The paradox is you want to make money, but you’re too lazy to do much to make it.
Next, you nd an analogy that contains the essence of the paradox, for example, I want light but
without using electrical energy. The solution to the analogy is using natural energy from the sun.

Final y, apply this principle to the problem of a lazy person making money. One solution is to go
to the South Sea islands and write a travel book.
Thinking Paradoxically
Fol owing are speci c guidelines for solving problems by creating a paradox, nding an
analogue, and using the unique feature of the analogue to trigger original ideas.
A CEO noted that when his high-tech company was smal , people would often meet
spontaneously and informal y. Out of these meetings came their best ideas. With the company’s
rapid growth, these informal meetings (and the number of good ideas) declined. He tried the
usual ways to stimulate creativity (meetings, dinners, parties, roundtables, etc.), but they did not
generate novel ideas. He wanted to recreate the spontaneous creative environment.

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
T-

1. Paradox. Convert the problem into a paradox. One of the things that distinguishes the

vision of genius is its curious relationship to contraries. Niels Bohr was fascinated with the
contrary dimensions of reality. Once in a heated debate over how electrons can appear in one
place and then in another without any traveling in between, he declared how wonderful it was
that they have met with a paradox, for now they could make intel ectual progress. Ask, “What is
the opposite or contradiction of the problem?” Then imagine both existing at the same time.
Example: The paradox of the company’s situation was that unless the gatherings were
unorganized they wouldn’t produce novel ideas.
2. Book title. Summarize the paradox into a book title that captures the essence and paradox of
the problem. The book title should be two words, usual y an
adjective and a noun. Some examples of book titles are Sales target— Focused Desire
Different level employees— Balanced Confusion Seasonal sales cycles— Connected Pauses
Birth control— Dependable Intermittence
Nature— Rational Impetuousness
Reducing the paradox into a book title makes it easier to work with and comprehend.
Example: In our example, the CEO summarized his paradox into the book title Unorganized
Gatherings.
3. Analogy. Find an analogy that re ects the essence of the paradox. Think of as many analogies
as you can and select the most suitable. Example: Our CEO found a suitable analogy in nature.
He thought of herring gul s, who are very unorganized scavengers but effective survivors.

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

4. Unique feature. What is the unique feature or activity of the analogue? Creative ideas often
involve taking unique features from one subject and applying them to another. John Hop eld was
a physicist who knew a lot about spin glass, which are magnetic substances in which the atoms
have a spin and interact in either a positive or negative way with each other. Hop eld discovered
that the brain is composed of neurons that are either on or off and either excite or inhibit one

another. He took a set of unique features from spin glass and applied them to the brain, thereby
creating his famous neural network theory.
Example: In our example, the CEO determined that the unique feature of his analogy is
“scavenging.” The gul s gather for an easy meal when shers throw unwanted sh and sh parts
back into the sea.
5. Equivalent. Use an equivalent of the “unique” feature to trigger new ideas.
Example: The equivalent of this unique feature might be to have people come together for
convenient meals at attractive prices.
6 . Build into a new idea. The company wil serve inexpensive gourmet food in the company
cafeteria. By subsidizing the cost of the gourmet food, the CEO encourages employees to gather
there (much like the herring gul s drawn to the shers free food) to meet informal y, mingle, and
exchange ideas.
W. J. J. Gordon used this strategy to develop Pringles potato chips, a matter of designing a new
potato chip and package that would al ow for more ef cient packaging of chips without the need
to l the bag with more air than chips. The paradox was a compact chip that would not destruct.
The book title that captured the essence of the paradox was Compact Destruction.
The analogy they worked with was bagging leaves in the fal . When you try to shove dry leaves
into a plastic bag, you have a dif cult time. But when the leaves
are wet (unique feature), they are soft and formable. A wet leaf conforms to the shape of its
neighbor with little air between them.
By wetting and forming dried potato our, the packaging problem was solved and Pringles got
its start.
Working Backward
Most of us are accustomed to converting a question (2 + 2=?) into an answer (4) according to a
rigid set of rules. If you nd a calculator someone has left on a desk and it says 4, you have no
way of knowing how they arrived at the number. Did someone punch in 2 + 2, 3 + 1, 1 + 1 + 1 +
1, or perhaps 9 – 5, or 1,239,477 – 1,239,473? There are an in nite number of possible ways to
reach 4.
Einstein is famous for visualizing his theory of relativity as a given and then working backward
to what was known.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

In the fol owing il ustration, see if you can link up the nine dots with one straight line without
lifting your writing instrument from the paper.

This problem is seemingly impossible for most people. Many of us work with the problem as
given and try to solve it without success. However, if you imagine the solution and work back to
the problem, you’l nd that it’s easily solved. Below is one imagined solution.
Now work backward to the problem and look for ways to achieve the solution. One solution is to
cut the dots out, tape them in a straight line, and then link up al nine with one straight line. You
might also have imagined one thick line crossing through al the dots at once. Working backward
from this solution, one need only swipe through the dots with a wide paintbrush. These kinds of
creative solutions probably would not have occurred to us if we worked in the conventional way
with the problem.

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
T Imagining that your problem is solved enables you to approach from the other side

and work in an opposite direction. Working backward enables you to think about your problem
more exibly by changing the problem components. Fol owing are guidelines for working
backward:
1. Close your eyes, relax, and imagine the best possible solution to your problem. Feel free to
fantasize any solution you can imagine.
2. Write the imagined solution on a sheet of paper. Include a brief description of how you pro t
from the solution, how you feel, and what you set in motion. 3. List the people, situations, or
events that made the imaginary solution possible.
4. For each person, situation, or event, list speci cal y how each contributed to the outcome.
5. Ask yourself how these speci cs were generated to solve the problem. Can you generate other
alternatives?
6. List the characteristics and properties of the speci cs. Do you see any de ciencies? If so, how
can you overcome and improve them?
7. What are the gaps that have to be completed to realize the solution? What do you need to do to
complete them? What else do you need to know? 8. Keep asking what should precede each step
and continue until you work back to the problem statement.
With conventional thinking, you move forward one step at a time. Each step arises directly from
the preceding step in a straight line. With thinking

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

“backward,” the steps are not sequential. You jump ahead to the conclusion and l in the gaps
afterwards. In the diagram below, conventional thinking proceeds methodical y from A to B to C

to D to the solution E. With “backward” thinking, you imagine an ideal solution, G, that you
probably could not arrive at thinking conventional y and then work backward to A to gure out
how to get there. When working backward from G, one nds a pathway from G to C to D to H to
A. The pathway is not sequential and includes steps (H) that you probably would not have
discovered thinking conventional y.

Nikola Tesla, the genius who ushered in the age of electricity, would often think of something as
given and work backward to the question.
For example, in his work on turbines, he imagined a turbine already built and ran it “in thought”
for one month. To Tesla, there was no difference whatsoever whether he “ran” something in
thought or physical y tested it in his shop. One month later, he disassembled the machine in his
mind and noted in precise detail the wear and tear on the pieces in his imaginary machine. Later,
a real turbine modeled after his imaginary one was built, run, and dissembled after one month.
Remarkably, Tesla’s description of where the wear and tear would occur matched the real
machine in every detail.

T-

Imagine working on your problem as you would in the future. Then transfer the solution

back to the present and look for ways to make your idea a present-day possibility. The guidelines
are
1. Select a target date in the future (2050) and imagine you are there. Write some sample future
headlines that deal with governments, private lives, technology, your company, and the
competition. Write a short story about a day in the life of an individual in the year 2050.
2. Generate a list of the most important things you would like to happen to your subject by the
year 2050. Imagine at least ve future possibilities. Ask the fol owing:

fi

fi

fi

What is impossible now but wil be possible in the year 2050 that involves my problem? What
would I have that I do not have now? What information and resources would I have that I do not
have now?

4. Ask how these speci cs were generated to solve the problem. Can you generate other
alternatives? List the characteristics and properties of the speci cs. Transporting your subject
into the future puts it into a different context and creates new relationships among the problem
components. Understanding these new relationships is what is meant by insight.
5. Look for any de ciencies. If you nd some, how can you overcome them? What are the gaps
that have to be completed to realize the solution?
6. Keep asking what should precede each step and continue until you work back to the problem
statement. By working backward from the future, we can discover what conditions would have to
prevail just prior to the desired goal in order for us to achieve that goal by means of speci c
actions. For example, suppose we wanted to go by train from Milwaukee to Boston. The best
strategy isn’t necessarily to investigate train connections from Milwaukee to Chicago, from
Chicago to Buffalo, from Buffalo to New York, and from New York to Boston. We can instead
nd out what trains come into Boston from the west during the period when we would like to
arrive. We can then nd out when these trains leave, say, Buffalo or New York, and in this way,
plan our way back to Chicago.
Groups

LOOKING AT THE OTHER SIDE
TA group exercise to get participants to consider desirable futures is to divide the group

into teams (three or four) and have each group develop an imagined future solution. The
solutions are put into separate envelopes. Each team gets an envelope with one of the future
solutions in it. The team writes an immediate action that can be taken to achieve this solution and
puts it into the envelope. The envelopes are passed from group to group. Each generates an
action without looking at what the others have written. When al groups have addressed al the
future solutions, the group leader reads the actions for achieving each solution, and the group
discusses and ranks them.

The Perfect Cup of Coffee

T-

Another way to work backward from a solution is to imagine a perfect solution, list the

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

signi cant factors that would make it a possibility, and then make a graph to nd out where you
are at present and what you need in order to make your solution a reality. For example, suppose I
wanted to brew the “perfect” cup of coffee. First I would de ne what I think is a “perfect cup of

fi

fi

3. Using these possibilities, imagine the best possible solution to your problem. Write the
solution in as much detail as possible. Then list the people, situations, or events that made the
imaginary solution possible, and speci cal y, how each contributed to the outcome.

coffee.” In this case, it’s what I think the “signi cant” factors are for a “perfect” cup of coffee,
which to me is the best tasting. In order to brew this perfect cup, I would need

fi

fi

• The world’s best coffeemaker
• The choicest blends from the best coffee growers
• Comprehensive knowledge of how to brew coffee
• The purest spring water
• The purest sugar
• The freshest and richest cream
Next, I list the opposite for each signi cant factor, in order to create a continuum, and graph it as
fol ows:

“The Perfect Cup of Coffee” “The Worst Cup of Coffee”

I place an X on the continuum (the vertical line represents halfway between the two extremes) to
represent where I am at this point in time. For example, the X for a coffeemaker indicates that my
coffeemaker is slightly above average, I use slightly above-average coffee blends, probably
know less than the average person about brewing coffee, use average water and sugar, and milk
instead of cream.
The graph il ustrates what I have to do to come close to the “perfect” cup of coffee. I’l have to
purchase a world-class coffeemaker, the choicest blend of coffee, the purest sugar, the freshest
cream, use spring water, and research how to better brew coffee or hire a master brewer to teach
me how to do it. I can choose to move al , some, or none of the X s toward the “perfect” cup.
mental perception seems to share many of the same information-processing mechanisms with the
human visual system. Your initial perception of a problem is narrow and smal , like an image in a
smal circle.

STRATEGY SEVEN:
LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
Genius is often marked by the ability to imagine comparisons and similarities and even similar
differences between paral el facts and events in different elds or “other worlds.” Why is X like
Y? If X works in a certain way, why can’t Y work in a similar way? Alexander Graham Bel
observed the similarities between the inner workings of the ear and the ability of a stout piece of
membrane to move steel, and conceived the telephone.
Like a spark that jumps across a gap, an idea from one world is used to create a new idea or
creative solution to a problem in another world.
Your mind is lying in wait for some cue or suggestion that wil initiate thinking about your
problem in a different way. When you use analogies between your subject and a subject in
another world, you produce cues and hints that wil make novel combinations and connections
more likely.
In the fol owing il ustration there are two sets of paral el lines The lines appear to have a clearly
de ned contour border between them Either of the lines can be seen as covering the other. Yet, in
reality, there is no border between the sets. There is nothing there. The il usion is created because
our minds try to make the gaps between the lines into something meaningful.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

In the same way, when you imagine comparisons and similarities between dissimilar

fi

subjects and events in different worlds, your mind wil struggle to look for cues and suggestions
to make the comparisons meaningful. For example, suppose I want to improve the common
ashlight and decide to look in another world for ideas. I look in the world of “automobiles” and

fi

fl

Expanding your perception of the problem by imagining an ideal solution enables you to
visualize the features and components that are necessary to realize the perfect solution, like an
image in a larger circle.

First, describe what’s involved in replacing a damaged tire. For Example:
1. Read the automobile manual on how to replace the tire.
2. There is no external power source, so you have to manual y crank the jack. 3. The jack is col
apsible.
4. The tire tread indicates usage and damage.
5. Most tires are guaranteed for a certain number of miles.
6. The spare tire is a temporary donut tire.
The descriptions—“no external power source,” “manual y crank,” and “col apsible”—are al cues
that inspired the invention of the eternal ashlight (a ashlight that doesn’t require an external
power source). The light has a col apsible crank that you unfold and rotate. The cranking creates
an electrical charge, which is sent to a minigenerator. Cranking the ashlight for thirty seconds
wil create fteen minutes of light.
Other ideas inspired by the analogy between ashlights and replacing tires are
1. Place rst-aid pamphlets in ashlights (from automobile manual).
2. Design a ashlight with a storage area for spare batteries (from spare tire).
3. Incorporate a color strip in the ashlight that changes color as the batteries discharge over
time, to indicate when to replace them (from tire tread indicates usage).
You can siphon water from a bucket by sucking the water upward in a tube. This is an
unconventional direction for water to travel. Once the water reaches a certain point, then the
siphon forms and the water wil ow natural y out of the bucket until the bucket is empty. In the
same way, creating ideas for improving the ashlight by making an analogy with replacing an
automobile tire is an unconventional way to think about the problem. Once your thinking reaches
a certain point, then your ideas begin to ow freely like water being siphoned from a bucket.

Geniuses have a remarkable eye for resemblances and cues between two subjects in different
worlds.

fl

fi

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fl

fi

fl

fi

Fol owing are ways of how to look into other worlds for analogies and cues that you can use to
generate original and new ideas.

fi

fl

choose the speci c act of “replacing a at tire.” Next I draw an analogy between “improving a
ashlight” and “replacing an automobile tire.” What cues can we nd in the world of “replacing
a tire” to help us improve the ashlight?

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TParallel Worlds

This is a structured technique that helps you imagine comparisons, similarities, and even similar
differences between subjects in “other worlds.” The guidelines are
1. State your chal enge. Example: A lumberyard owner stated, In what ways might I sell more
lumber?
2. Choose key words or a phrase in the chal enge. Example: “Sel .”
3. Choose a paral el world or distant eld. The greater the distance between the paral el world
and your chal enge, the greater the chances of producing new thoughts and ideas. A business
analogy to a business chal enge is too close-analogies from television or cooking might be more
likely to stimulate creative thought.
Example: The eld selected for the chal enge of sel ing more lumber was “computers.”
4. List the images and thoughts that you associate with your chosen paral el world. Then choose
one or more of the particularly rich ones.
Listing images wil al ow you to describe the analogy in as much detail as possible.
Example: Among the images evoked by the computer eld are science, multiple uses, userfriendly, hardware, software, add-ons, computer-aided design, computer schools, business uses,
and recreational uses.
5. Draw analogies between the images and your subject. Look for similarities and connections.
Generate as many associations as you can.
Example: The lumberyard owner looked at a number of connections between the images and his
chal enge of sel ing more lumber, ultimately discarding most of them. The nal images he
focused on were computer-aided design (CAD), computer add-ons, and recreational uses.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

He combined and connected these three concepts with his chal enge of sel ing lumber, stirring an
idea. The combination of al three with his chal enge stirred an idea. The idea: Use CAD to design
backyard decks. Provide a computerized system in the lumberyard where salespeople can design
decks to customer’s speci cations. The owner would have a user-friendly kiosk with a large
video screen and easy-to-use controls that the salesperson would manipulate. The customer
explains the deck’s size and the number of stairways needed, and selects railings and spindles.
The system could then design it from the ground up and calculate the cost. If the cost is too high,
the customer can change the dimensions. Once the price is right, the computer could print out the
diagrams and ful instructions. This free service would encourage more building of decks, and the
lumberyard would sel more lumber.

The paral el world should be something you know about, and you should use a speci c object,
situation, event, or example from that world. For instance: “The NFL footbal team, the San
Francisco 49ers” wil make a much more fruitful analogy than “footbal .” A speci c dance
movement is much more fruitful than “bal et.” The more details you can record, the better. If you
choose “restaurants,” choose a speci c, familiar restaurant.
Use this list of paral el worlds to get started, but do develop your own unique list that best suits
your particular knowledge. You might want to focus on particular disciplines or activities that are
of special interest and that are not related to your chal enge. When choosing a paral el world,
examine four or ve possible worlds and then select the one world that best suits the general
principles of your chal enge.
Parallel Worlds List
Accounting Acupuncture Animal Kingdom Architecture Art Astrology Astronomy Bal et Basebal
Basketbal Biography Biology Birds Black Power Movement Bowling Calculus Cancer
Cardiology Caribbean Cartoons Chemistry China Chiropractic Civil War Comics Composers
Computers Dance Dentistry Desert Economics Education England Entertainment Evolution
Farming Fast-Food Industry Finance Fine Cooking Fishing Flying Footbal Funeral Homes
Garbage Col ecting Geography Geology Germany Golf Government Great Books Great
Depression Grocery Stores Hawaii History Hunting Hypnosis India IRS Insects Interior
Decorating Inventions Japan Journalism Jungle Korea Law Law Enforcement Literature Ma a
Manufacturing Math Medicine Meteorology Military Mining Monasteries Monuments Moon
Movies Music Mythology Nuclear Power Physics Nutrition Ocean Old West Olympics
Pharmacology Philosophy Photography Physical Fitness Physical Therapy Physics Planets
Plumbing Political Science Politics Pornography Printing Psychiatry Psychology Publishing
Religion Resorts Restaurants Revolutionary War Russia Sailing Sculpture Seminars Shakespeare
Skiing Soap Operas Sociology South America Space Special Education Stars Taverns Television
TV News Steel Industry Sun Talk Radio Tennis Terrorism Theater Transportation Travel Industry
Unions Vatican Vietnam Wal Street Wholesalers Wine World War I World War I Yukon
One of the advantages of looking for analogies in paral el worlds is that if one image doesn’t
work, you can choose another image or another world and stil another until you get the
inspiration you need. People sometimes make the elementary mistake of thinking that one’s rst
effort at an analogy must be right. But consider the fol owing problem of long division. Does the
divisor go into the dividend six, seven or eight times?
326,574 ÷ 47
Who cares? You don’t have to know, if you have any judgment to do long division. You can
choose a number, at random if you like, and check out the result. If the number is too smal ,
increase it by one and try again; if too large, decrease it. The good thing about long division is
that it always works eventual y, even if you make a poor rst choice, in which case it just takes a
little longer. This is the magic of this technique. You simply generate images from a paral el
world and test them out. If you don’t get the inspiration you need, you try again.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Groups

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TFol owing are “Paral el World” guidelines for smal groups. For example, suppose a

group wanted ways to show clients the bottom-line bene ts of investing in training and personnel
development in their R and D department.
1. Ask the group to rephrase the problem as a wish.
Example: We wish we could get clients to visualize themselves using the new products and skil s
that would come out of training in this department. 2. Have the group single out the key words in
the wish.
Example: “New products” and “skil s.”
3. Present the group with a list of ten or so paral el worlds and ask the group to choose two
worlds unrelated to the problem.
Example: “Mining” and “weather.”
4. Have the group apply the key words to these worlds to help generate seemingly irrelevant
images and associations.
Example: Have the group brainstorm new products and skil s in mining and weather. Some
possible mining subjects might be “focus-blasting,” “new technology to restore the
environment,” “lights on hats,” and so on.
5. Ask the group to improvise connections between their images and associations and the
problem.
Example: Focus-blasting inspires one to think about putting a lot of resources into one area of
training. You might set up a pilot program smal enough so that you could have al the resources
you need to do it right- to real y get results. Then you would use these results to show clients the
payback of investing in training and development.
World of Essences

fi

An enlightening experiment was done by gestalt psychologists with a group of dogs. The dogs
were trained to approach something when shown a white square and avoid it when shown a gray
square. When the dogs learned this, the experimenters switched to using a gray square and a
black square. The dogs immediately shifted to approaching the object in response to the gray
square (which had previously triggered avoidance) and avoiding the object when shown the
black square (which had not been conditioned to anything). Presumably, rather than perceive the
gray as an absolute stimulus, the dogs were responding to the deeper essence of “lighter versus
darker” as opposed to gray, white, or black as being things.

As humans, many of us have lost the sensitivity to deeper relationships and essences because
we’ve become educated to focus on the particulars of experience as opposed to the universals.
For example, suppose we were asked to design a new can opener. Most of our ideas would be
driven by our experience and association with the particulars of existing can openers, and we
would likely design something that is only marginal y different from existing can openers. If,
however, we determined the essence of a can opener to be “opening things” and looked for
analogies and cues in other worlds, we increase our chances of discovering a novel idea. One
example of “opening things” are pea pods. Ripening weakens the seams on a pea pod and it
opens. This inspires the idea of opening a can by pul ing a weak seam (like a pea pod). Instead of
an idea to improve the can opener, we produced an idea for a new can design
Working with principles and essences wil break you out of the habit of associating qualities with
things and wil expand your thinking.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T--

To work with the “World of Essences,” rst decide the major principle represented

by your problem. What is the essence of it? For example, the essence of a new marketing
strategy might be “attraction,” namely, how are things and people attracted. Once you determine
its essence, then generate a list of things from other worlds that represent the major principle.
Examples of “attracting” are
• Bees attracted to honey
• Magnets attracting metal
• Politicians attracting voters
• People attracted to a Web site on the Internet
• Col eges attracting premier athletes
Select one example and describe it in as much detail as possible. For example, “politicians
attracting voters” suggests many things, including the theme of “values,” “canvassing voters
door to door,” and “debates.” Use the descriptions to suggest analogies and look for cues to
stimulate ideas.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

For example, both major political parties campaigned on the “values” theme differently in the
last presidential election. The Republicans used adjectives —“honesty,” “honor,” and
“reliability”—whereas the Democrats used verbs and speci c accomplishments. The campaign
using verbs was the more successful with voters who identi ed it as proactive and actionoriented. This triggers the thought of an action-oriented marketing strategy using action verbs
and speci c customer bene ts.

Sometimes the descriptor itself wil provide the cue for an idea as it did for a group of engineers
who wanted to improve the telephone. They determined that the essence of a telephone was “a
way of communicating.” They listed several “different ways of communicating,” including
• With sign language
• With nonverbal language
• With hugs and embraces
• Cats, communication by rubbing
• Police codes used to communicate with each other
The descriptor “hugs and embraces” was the cue that inspired them to invent a telephone that
could actual y reach out and touch you. The telephone incorporates video, audio, and touch.
When you press down on a pad of pins (force transducers), the pins come up at the other end of
the line. Wherever you touch, or however you move your ngers, that exact same pressure and
design wil be transmitted to the other pad.
Thomas Edison had a particular talent for identifying the essence of a problem and then nding
an appropriate analogy. For example, one of his discoveries was how to send four simultaneous
messages along a telegraph wire, two in each direction. This was important at the time—it would
quadruple the power of the telegraph without the need of having to build four times the number
of wires. The essence of his problem was “ ow of current,” and he looked to the world of water.
He built an “analog” of the electric wire, with pipes and valves and assorted gadgets for affecting
the ow of water in the pipe. Using gadgets to force water back and forth in the pattern of wires,
he tinkered and ended up separating the separable features of the ow of current, sending one
message control ed by one wire and another control ed by another wire.
Worlds of Special Interest
Most of us possess expert knowledge in some hobby, discipline, or special activity. You can
create new ideas by transferring relationships and concepts from your area of special interest to
your problem.
For many years, physiologists could not understand the purpose of the long loops in the kidneys:
It was assumed that the loops had no special function and were a relic of the way the kidney had
evolved. Then one day, a physiologist with a special interest in engineering looked at the loops
and recognized that they could be part of a countercurrent multiplier, a wel -known engineering
device for increasing the concentration of solutions. His interest in engineering provided the
answer to something that had been a medical puzzle for a long time. When you identify an idea
in one area, you can then generate other complementary ideas with similar dynamics in other
areas.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
Tfi

fl

fi

fl

fl

The guidelines are

1. List several concepts from your discipline or area of special interest. For example, if your
interest is footbal , you might list such items as the Super Bowl, player free agency, TV
contracts, Monday Night Football promotions, expansion franchises, and so on.
2. Select one concept and describe it in as much detail as you can. List the images and thoughts
that it inspires. Then use each description to generate ideas. Look for similarities and connections
between each description and your problem and draw analogies.
Groups

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TWhen brainstorming in a smal group, ask each participant to select one discipline or

activity of special interest. Each participant then selects a concept from his or her selected
discipline and the facilitator lists it on a board or ip chart. After al the concepts are recorded, the
group selects one, and the person responsible for it provides a detailed description. For example,
suppose a person selected bal et as an area of special interest. He or she would select a particular
dance movement as his or her concept. Next, she or he would describe the dance movement in
detail, and perhaps, even demonstrate the movement. Now, the group would list descriptions and
draw analogies between the dance movement and their problem and use the analogies as stimuli
for new ideas. The group would continue to select additional concepts and repeat the process
until they are satis ed with the ideas they generated.
A heart surgeon became a fan of Edward Deming, the noted management consultant, and studied
his industrial management techniques and attended his seminars. He convinced a group of heart
surgeons to apply Deming’s techniques to their practice. By applying industrial management
techniques to heart surgery, they learned how to share information about how they practiced and
stopped functioning as individual craftspeople.
They reduced the death rate among their patients by one-fourth.
The World of Nature
Look at the world of nature for analogies with your problem. Arti cial intel igence researchers
went off on a dead-end track for years by trying to design around a single processing level in
neural networks. Eventual y it was found that multilayer processing eliminated this fundamental
barrier.
The AI researchers might have avoided this wasted time and effort by checking rst with nature.
By asking any biologist, they would have quickly and easily learned that the image-processing
cel s in the eye exist in three distinct layers.

fi

fi

fl

fi

Consider the story of George de Mestral, a Swiss inventor, who was hunting one day in the late
1940s when he and his dog accidental y brushed up against a bush that left them both covered
with burrs. When de Mestral tried to remove the burrs, they clung stubbornly to his clothes. This

would be a minor annoyance to most of us, but de Mestral was curious about why the burrs were
so hard to remove. After he got home, he studied them under a microscope and discovered that
hundreds of tiny hooks on each burr had snagged on the threads of his pants. Thinking analogical
y, de Mestral imagined comparisons and similarities between the world of “wild burrs” and the
world of “fasteners.”
There fol owed several years of work, as de Mestral tried to gure out how to attach tiny hooks
to a piece of tape in such a way that they would stay lined up. He also struggled to nd a way of
producing tiny loops for the hooks to attach to. After testing many methods, he nal y succeeded.
The result: Velcro fasteners, now used on mil ions of items, from blood pressure cuffs to tennis
shoes.
In the il ustration below, the hexagon on the left is contained in the gure on the right, yet it is
not perceived as such. Its presence can be veri ed by tracing its outline with a pencil. No part of
its perimeter has been removed or altered.

The pattern on the right is made up of lines that, taken together, make the hexagon invisible,
unless you deliberately search for it. Similarly, many of the similarities and similar differences
between your subject and objects or events in nature that can help you discover an analogical
connection with your subject are wel disguised. You have to deliberately search for the
appropriate subjects and events in nature.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

Take a nature walk (real or imagined) and look around. Underwater construction was

made possible by observing how shipworms tunnel into timber by rst constructing tubes. The
question to ask is “What objects, events, or patterns in nature can I use to develop my idea?”
Suppose you wanted to nd a new way to handle home trash. Examples:
• What happens to leaves in the woods?
• How do animals handle their waste?
• How do insects handle waste? Birds? Reptiles?

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

• How does nature handle volcanic ash?

Then,:
1. Select one example and make an analogy between it and your problem. Describe the analogy
in as much detail as possible. List al the similarities and connections that you can. List similar
differences.
Example: RCA/Whirlpool engineers wanted to nd a new way to handle home trash. They asked
what animal handles its own waste most ef ciently? Cows were inef cient, but goats were very
ef cient. Their waste comes out in a dry, wel -contained solid form, much like an encapsulated
pel et.
2. Try to force a connection between al the items on your list and the problem. Al ow yourself to
free associate from the items to other ideas as wel . Example: The idea of “encapsulating waste”
led to the development of the Trash Masher, the rst of a line of trash compactors.
The World of Imagination
Our usual thinking is logical and goal-oriented. Creativity is dif cult with this kind of thinking
because the conclusion is implicit in the premises.
We could think of this kind of thinking as crystal ine. It is nicely structured, but the probability of
two remotely associated thoughts or concepts bumping into each other is zero. Creative thinking
is analogical, fantastical, and associative. We could compare movement toward creative thinking
as analogous to heating the crystal. When heated through, it turns into a uid. In the uid state,
the probability of two remotely associated thoughts or concepts col iding and combining is
tremendously increased. If we had a awed or imperfect crystal (imperfect idea or solution), this
is, in fact, just what we would do: heat it so that it turned into a uid (move toward creative
thinking) and then gradual y lower the temperature (move back toward logical thinking). The
result would be a awless crystal.
One way to move toward creative thinking (heating the crystal) when your thinking has crystal
ized is to forget your problem and take an imaginary excursion. You visualize an imaginary
excursion into or through some location or time in history that has nothing to do with the
problem and look for ways to make analogies between what you imagine and your problem.
One way to move toward creative thinking (heating the crystal) when your thinking has crystal
ized is to forget your problem and take an imaginary excursion. You visualize an imaginary
excursion into or through some location or time in history that has nothing to do with the
problem and look for ways to make analogies between what you imagine and your problem.

fl

fl

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fl

fi

For example, a group of Department of Defense weapons specialists were faced with the chal
enge of modifying missiles. They were stonewal ed. Final y, one of the participants suggested
that the group take an imaginary excursion into the desert. For ten minutes, they imagined
walking through a desert and listed everything they saw and experienced. One of the participants
imagined seeing a “sidewinder,” a poisonous snake. Someone else remarked that a sidewinder
locates its prey by sensing body heat. This inspired the idea of an air-to-air missile that homes in

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

There are three major steps in the excursion process: the excursion itself, the drawing of

analogies between the problem and the events in the excursion, and the analysis of these
analogies to see what new ideas or solutions can be created. The guidelines are 1. Excursion.
Visualize an imaginary excursion into or through some location that has nothing to do with the
problem at hand. Close your eyes and imagine a journey through some exotic location, for
example, a journey in a submarine to the bottom of the deepest part of the ocean, a visit to a gold
miner’s camp in 1850, or a safari in Africa. Let go and let your imagination roam. Write down
detailed descriptions of everything you see and feel on your imaginary journey.

It’s interesting to note that the major nineteenth-century English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge
used imaginary excursions to inspire the exotic imagery in his poetic masterpieces—“The Rime
of the Ancient Mariner” and “Kubla Khan.” By letting himself go and imagining himself in some
remote location or period of time, he was able to see images that he was able to incorporated into
his poetry.
2. Analogies. Draw analogies between what you saw and the problem. Coleridge once reported
that though most people perceive the differences in things, the key to his genius was his eternal
pursuit of what is common between things. In addition to analogies, express the connections and
relationships between your images and the problem in any way that captures what you see. Try to
force a connection between every description of things you saw or experienced on your
imaginary journey and the subject.
3. Analysis. Look for ways to use the analogies and relationships to solve the problem. Try to
gure out what the relationships mean in terms of the subject, that is, how understanding these
relationships can be used to solve the problem. This is the real y chal enging part of the process.
It’s important to understand that the more you work at guring out what these connections and
relationships are, the greater your chances for a creative breakthrough.
When you relate and make connections between your subject and events or objects from your
imaginary excursion, you activate more and different thought patterns. Let us say you make a
weak connection between two thoughts. You’re unclear as to why they are related or what the
signi cance is. You think about something else and activate a third thought, which is weakly
associated to the rst two. Since they are already partial y activated, al the connections are
strengthened. If they are strengthened suf ciently, insight for a new idea or thought occurs.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Suppose you were asked to develop a satisfactory fastener for a re ghter’s protective suit. You
need something that’s protective and something that the re ghter can get in and out of fast. You
take an imaginary excursion to another planet in the solar system and imagine nding yourself in

fi

fi

on enemy jets by detecting the planes’ heat emissions. Natural y, it was named the Sidewinder
missile.

a thick jungle. The rst thought is “fastener” and the second thought is “thick jungle.” You next
imagine the planet life to be overlapping and interlaced like a giant, thick, interlaced wal . It’s
literal y impossible to get through. In this example, the connections between the three thoughts
might suggest the overlapping and interlacing clutching of a Velcro-like fastener for re ghter’s
protective suits.
Groups

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TWhen using the excursion technique in a group, the facilitator creates the imaginary

excursion (we’re at the North Pole and trapped in a blizzard, we are scuba diving in the Florida
Keys, or we are at the Smithsonian Institute, and so on) and directs the group members to
visualize and write down everything they see for ten minutes. Encourage the participants to let
go and let their imaginations roam. Then, take ten or fteen minutes to have the participants
draw analogies and express relationships between their visual images and the problem. Each
participant should do this silently. Al ow them to express relationships in any way they wish.
Lastly, the participants share their analogies and other thoughts and determine how the analogies
and thoughts can help solve the problem.
One group of interior designers wanted to send videos of their work to potential clients but
discovered that it was too expensive. They went on a Wild West excursion and imagined a
watering hole where cowboys, frontier people, horses, cattle, and Indians al gathered to drink.
This inspired the idea to get fabric manufacturers and other wholesalers and retailers to share the
production and distribution costs by paying for minicommercials.
The World of Einstein
Rather than use logic and mathematics to explore possibilities, Einstein would sometimes
explore fundamental and abstract principles through his impressions and images by constructing
imaginary metaphorical scenarios. He would interact with imaginary beings in imaginary worlds,
not with disassociated numbers and facts. For example, he would visualize himself walking
alone down a street and “fal ing in love.” Two weeks later, he would imagine meeting the woman
he fel in love with for the rst time. He would then question and examine the metaphor for ideas
and conjectures that he could apply to his real-world problem. How can you fal in love with
someone before you meet them? This particular imaginary scenario helped him to think about
causality.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fl

fi

fi

On other occasions, Einstein imagined himself as a two-dimensional being living in a twodimensional world, with a at measuring rod conducting experiments on in nity; as a man in an
elevator being pul ed through space by some imaginary creature; or as a blind beetle circling a
perfect sphere endlessly. One of his imaginary metaphors was riding on a beam of light, holding
a perfect mirror, trying to see his re ection.

According to classical physics, you could not, because light leaving your face would have to
travel faster than light in order to reach the mirror.
Einstein played with these mental pictures and made up different rules for the universe. It was
this kind of thinking that led to his famous theory of relativity.
Fol owing are guidelines on how to construct and use imaginary metaphorical scenarios to get
ideas and solve problems: 1. Close your eyes, relax, and picture your subject or problem in your
mind.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

Example: Suppose you are a doctor faced with a patient who has a malignant tumor in

his stomach. It is impossible to operate, but unless the tumor is destroyed, the patient wil die.
There is a ray that can be used to destroy the tumor. If the rays reach the tumor al at once at
suf ciently high intensity, the tumor wil be destroyed. Unfortunately, at this intensity the healthy
tissue that the rays pass through on the way to the tumor wil also be destroyed. At lower
intensities, the rays are harmless to healthy tissue, but they wil not affect the tumor either. What
type of procedure might be used to destroy the tumor with the rays and at the same time avoid
destroying the healthy tissue?
2. Identify the “essence” or the principle of the problem. Think of the essence as the fundamental
de nition and perception of the problem.
Example: The essence of our example problem might be “how to concentrate a force on a target
without destroying anything but the target.”
3. Forget the problem and concentrate on the “essence” or “principle.” Create an imaginary
scenario that captures the “essence” of the problem. Use your imagination and write a
metaphorical story or fairy tale that presents a similar problem in as much detail as possible. The
story must be metaphorical. For instance, in our example, we take the essence of our “medical”
problem and write an imaginary metaphorical
“military” scenario as fol ows:
An evil dictator ruled from a strong fortress. The fortress was situated in the middle of the
country, surrounded by farms and vil ages. Many roads radiated outward from the fortress like
spokes on a wheel.

fi

fi

A good general wanted to destroy the fortress and free the country. The general believed that if
his entire army could attack the fortress at once, it could be destroyed. However, the general had
reason to believe that the dictator had planted mines on each of the roads. The mines were set so
that smal bodies of men could pass over them safely, since the dictator needed to be able to move
troops and workers to and from the fortress. However, any large force would detonate the mines.
Not only would this blow up the road and render it impassable, but the explosions would destroy

neighboring property as wel . A ful -scale direct attack on the fortress, therefore, appeared
impossible.
4. Solve the problem as expressed in the imaginary scenario.
Example: One idea would be to divide the army into smal groups. Each group charged down a
different road in a synchronized fashion. Al of the smal groups would be able to pass over the
mines and then meet simultaneously at the fort and attack it in ful strength.
5. Transfer this solution to solve your original problem.
Example: Instead of using a single high-intensity ray ( gure A), the doctor (the general) could
administer several low-intensity rays at once from different directions (divide the army into smal
groups). In that way, each ray would be at a low intensity along its path and hence harmless to
the healthy tissue ( gure B), but the effects of the rays would combine to achieve the effect of a
high-intensity ray at their focal point (attacked the fortress in ful strength), the site of the tumor
(the fortress).
Think of a river that has cut deep into the land. Water always ows into the most probable
places, so when it rains, the water is drained into the deep-cut river. It’s drained off so fast it
leaves no opportunity for other lakes or other rivers to form. In the same way, your usual way of
thinking about a subject determines your focus and directs your thinking into one channel,
leaving no opportunity for other approaches or different ways of thinking to form. Your initial
focus can be an obstacle to creative thinking. An imaginary scenario helps us to achieve an “outof-focus” look at the subject or some aspect of it. This out-of-focus experience can trigger new
and unexpected ideas and approaches.
Sample Scenarios
Fol owing are some sample scenarios to use for some common business problems:
Challenge: How can we reorganize our business?
Scenario: A comet hits the earth and permanently wipes out everyone’s long-term memory,
except the people in this room. How do we handle this global situation? Challenge: How do we
improve corporate communications?
Scenario: Astronauts travel to Mars. While they are visiting Mars, the perception of events
becomes different for each astronaut, depending on his or her prior history. They perceive
everything differently. A sequence of events can be anything: quick or slow, orderly or random,
causal or without cause, salty or sweet, and so on. How can they work together in order to return
to earth?

fl

fi

fi

Challenge: How can we create a new marketing promotion?
Scenario: We discover a group of primitive cave dwel ers who live in the mountains and do not
understand any language. How do we advance their lives? Challenge: How can we get upper
management to approve our idea?

Scenario: The Later family is immortal. From the beginning of time, no family member has ever
died. Each member is alive, and most have married ad in nitum. Joe, the youngest member,
desires to marry and wants con rmation of his decision. How does he get his family’s approval?
World of Images
Words tend to impose strong, subtle pressures on us to see the world as xed, fragmented, and
static. Yet everything in life is in a state of ux and change. Even the paper on which this book is
printed appears to have a stable existence, but we know that it is, at this moment, changing and
evolving toward dust. This is one reason why Einstein preferred to use mental images and
symbols, instead of words, when he thought. In fact, Einstein rarely thought in words at al when
trying to work out a theory.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

Try to represent the key elements of your chal enge in mental images that symbolical y

represent your subject. Disassociate yourself from labels and words and just make mental
pictures of the problem. Close your eyes and picture your chal enge or problem in your mind.
Block out verbal thoughts. (This can be done by repeating a simple word such as “aum” or “om”
over and over.) Try to imagine images that symbolical y represent your subject or some aspect of
it. Write down or draw the images and associations that you conjure up. Draw analogies between
these thoughts and your subject. Look for relationships and connections.
In the fol owing il ustration, the chal enge is to rearrange the matches to make “nothing.” No
matchsticks may be bent, broken, or placed over each other. First, try to solve it using your usual
way of thinking. Most people cannot solve this problem. Next, close your eyes and imagine the
concept of “nothing.” What symbolical y represents it? Write down the images and associations
that you conjure up. See if you can make the connection between your images and the chal enge
to solve it.

fi

fi

fl

fi

Some 60 percent of people who use this technique solve the problem. Once they make a mental
picture of the concept, they work back to the problem and rearrange the matches to correspond to
their mental picture.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

If you are adept at visualizing, the ideas wil emerge spontaneously and effortlessly. If a

chain of images emerges, often the rst ones are the most signi cant. If you have trouble
conjuring up symbolic images, imagine you meet a Martian who does not understand any earthly
language and who communicates with abstract symbols. You want to communicate your problem
to the Martian, because you feel it wil be able to help you. Write out your problem and then
translate it into abstract symbols.
A chemist, who had the task of improving seed corn, imagined images of seeds wearing heavy
clothing in the winter and shorts in the summer.
The images symbolical y represented his problem—how to protect seeds from the elements. The
image of clothing inspired him to think of synthetics, including polymers. This led to his idea of
intel igent polymer seed coatings, which shift properties as conditions change. The seeds can be
planted in any weather or season. They lie protected and dormant when it’s cold outside and
sprout as soon as the soil reaches the right growing temperature.

fi

fl

fi

fi

A group of engineers used imagery to invent a compact, exible jacking mechanism that extends
some three feet and supports up to ve tons. Among the symbolic mental images the group

produced were
• A magician who had to create an il usion in which the rope, at rst, is coiled and soft, then
becomes hard as it extends out into the audience • The hydraulic principle of the erection of the
penis
• A steel tape measure
• A bicycle chain with exible links that stiffen as they are driven out of the jacking mechanism
These images combined to provide a concept on which the compact jack was ultimately based.
Pattern Language
The noted physicist Niels Bohr found language simply inadequate to describe what goes on
inside the atom. He worked out his complex atomic models, not with classical mechanical
notation, but by visualizing abstract symbols and putting them into different relationships. Later,
he translated the visual to the verbal. Even when working with very complex processes, geniuses
tend to use graphic, abstract models as the basis for their thinking. These models are often
simpli cations of reality, focusing only on certain essential elements. Instead of mathematical
equations, Einstein often thought in terms of simple pictures of basic shapes (spheres, disks,
triangles) and their relationships to each other.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TPattern language is a language of abstract symbols that you create to substitute for

words. It’s a structured way to translate your problem into symbols and then arrange the symbols
into patterns. It was rst invented by architects Alexander, Ishikawa, and Silverstein to help
create new building designs. The guidelines are
1. Determine and list the major components of your problem. For instance, in marketing a
product you might have four components: packaging, distribution, promotion, and sel ing. Under
each component, list as many variations and possibilities as you can (different ways to package,
distribute, promote, and sel ).
2. Describe each variation by drawing an abstract graphic symbol. Each drawing should be on a
separate index card and represent a speci c variation. On the back of the card, write the
variation. Draw the graphics on different-colored cards or use colored pencils to differentiate the
various components. You could draw the appropriate graphics on red cards for packaging, yel ow
for distribution, blue for marketing, and white for sel ing.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

3. Place al the cards on a table with the graphic symbols facing up. Group and regroup the
symbols randomly into various relationships. Try letting the cards arrange themselves without
conscious direction, as if they were tel ing you where they wanted to be. Mix and match the
symbols to provoke different sets of interesting relationships, without thinking about what the
symbols mean.

4. When you create an interesting arrangement, turn the cards over to see what the written
elements are, and then, try to build a new idea from these elements. 5. When stumped, add other
components and possibilities or even start an entirely new set.
Sand Tray
Ronald Hoffmann of Cornel University shared the 1981 Nobel Prize in chemistry for a
signi cant breakthrough in theoretical organic chemistry: a way to predict from rst principles
whether a reaction wil occur. He is also a poet. His poetry helped set his imagination in motion
using metaphors between chemistry and his poems. Metaphorical thinking shifts your
perspective, not gradual y, but with a vengeance.

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

The sand tray technique is an interesting way to think metaphorical y by substituting

physical objects for mental images. You need a large sand tray. At the start of an encounter with
the sand tray, the surface is raked smooth and clean. Surrounding it are literal y hundreds of
bright objects: tiny dol s, colored marbles, shel s, feathers, bits of wood, plastic toy soldiers, a
miniature bride and groom, fake dinosaurs, rubber snakes, mean sharks, toy pistols, and so on.
Then,
1. Empty your mind of al distractions and concentrate on your subject.
2. Choosing whatever objects you fancy, build a scene in the sand that metaphorical y represents
your subject or some aspect of your subject.
3. Arrange the objects in any way that you feel is interesting. Keep adding and arranging until the
scene “feels right” symbolical y.
4. Interpret the scene. The patterns of the scene and each object convey meaning. As you
interpret each object, free associate from it.
When interpreting the scene, be on the lookout for parts that puzzle you, seem to be missing, or
that show up when you change your focus. Ask questions such as
“What is this?”
“What could this mean?”
“What does the frequency of this object mean?”
“Who does this represent?”

fi

fi

“What object comes closest to the essence of my subject?”

“What does this remind me of?”
Among these questions, one may stand out as the key to resolving the problem.
5. Write out your interpretations. Search for clues, new ideas, insights, and new lines of
speculation. Combine the interpretations into one al -inclusive narrative. Try writing a story
explaining how your sand-tray scene relates to your subject.
The gift of the imagination is more important than a talent for absorbing knowledge. Consider
Benoit Mandelbrot, the Euclid of the twentieth century, who invented fractal geometry which
applies to such complicated objects as trees seacoasts snow akes and crashing waves.
Mandelbrot revealed that these objects in nature possess “self-similarity”: a twig has the shape of
the branch it sprouts from, the branch the shape of the tree. Incredibly, Mandlebrot claims not to
know the alphabet or how to use a telephone book. He is untrained in basic mathematics and is
unable to do solutions the “straight” way.
When Mandelbrot took the entrance exams at France’s prestigious Ecole Polytechnique, he was
unable to do algebra but succeeded in getting the top grade by translating the questions mental y
into pictures. By thinking visual y, he could see things others could not. For example, he couldn’t
program a computer but developed the skil to debug programs that he could not read, by
analyzing the wrong “pictures” these programs produce.
He imagined a different way of looking at things and invented a new form of mathematics. The
sand-tray technique activates your imagination and al ows it to oat freely, unrestrained by
straight thinking inhibitions.
Groups

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TIn a group, discuss the subject and then ask one participant to build a scene that

represents the subject in the sand tray. The group studies the scene and generates as many
interpretations as possible. These are listed on a chalkboard and related to the subject one at a
time. In this form of expression, undertaken in a protected environment, the answers that emerge
often surprise the maker and may re ect everything from an insight about an unarticulated
experience to a profound statement about the subject.
A technique similar in nature to the sand-tray technique is the metaphorical col age. A col age is
an assembly of various pictures, either as wholes or fragments put together, in such a way that
each element loses its separate identity as it becomes part of the whole. The col age is greater
than, and often different from, the sum of it parts.

fl

fl

fl

Max Ernst, one of the leading surrealist artists in the twentieth century, discovered that the
chance encounters of two or more dissimilar subjects in a col age stimulated his imagination and

encouraged him to think metaphorical y. When two or more dissimilar subjects col ide in a col
age, the imagination transforms them into an altogether new reality transcendent over the
separate elements. For example, a picture of seals performing in a marine show next to a picture
of a building may become a metaphor for salespeople performing for customers, a user-friendly
computer program, a job interview, and so on. The imagination transforms the picture into a
symbol for many different things.
A metaphoric picture al ows you to activate your right brain and gives you a view of the problem
that might otherwise remain invisible. Years back, a team of Israeli Air Force doctors believed
they could improve the bandage. When they protected wounds from germs with bandages, they
discovered that the bandages also cut off the body’s circulation, which slowed down the healing
process. A picture of an electric lamp with cord and a picture of men repairing a bridge were the
stimuli for a new idea. They were inspired to think about repairing a broken cord by splicing it.
You have to be careful to splice in such a way that the current is not interrupted. One of the
elements that conducts electricity is magnesium. This led to the idea of a magnesium-coated
bandage that does not interrupt the body’s circulation.
Metaphoric images help stimulate your thinking. When you compare your subject with
something else and discover the relatedness between them, then your mind can generate other
ideas with similar relations. The metaphors you create may provide the clue to some aspect of
your subject that otherwise might remain invisible. The guidelines for constructing a creative col
age are

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T - Metaphoric Collage
1. Cut out several pictures or parts of pictures from magazines, newspapers, catalogs, yers, and
so on.
2. Mix and match the pictures by moving them around into different patterns and associations.
Play with the pictures until you get a feeling for possible ways to use these patterns. Form
patterns and associations without forcing them. Continue until your col age feels complete. Make
one large metaphorical picture by assigning a word or phrase to each picture and then completing
the sentence “My subject is a lot like (insert a word or phrase from the montage) because it ...”
Think metaphorical y and analogical y. The R and D staff for a furniture company looked for
ways to develop a paint that does not fade, chip, or scratch. They made a col age that included
pictures of various trees and plants. The col age triggered a discussion of how trees and plants
get their color. Their subsequent research inspired the idea of “everlasting” color. They created
the idea of injecting trees with dye additives that would impregnate the plant cel s with color,
spreading it throughout the tree. The tree is painted before it is cut down.

fl

Another interesting way to col age your subject is to create two separate col lages to represent
two separate aspects of your subject. Suppose you want to improve corporate communications.

You could create one col age to represent upper management and another one to represent
employees. With the two sets of visuals, compare the common points and identify the gaps
between upper management and the employees.
Groups

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TThis is a fun exercise to do with a smal group. Participants enjoy creating col ages

because they can use the more visual, feeling part of their brains and nd an entirely different
way of looking at the problem. The guidelines for a smal group are 1. Pass out old magazines
and scissors.
2. Ask each participant to cut out images and pictures from various magazines that metaphorical
y represent your subject or some aspect of it.
3. Have each person make a col age. Paste the images and pictures in an arrangement that’s
aesthetical y pleasing.
4. Assign a word or phrase to each picture on the montage.
5. Each person then transforms the subject into one large metaphorical word picture by
completing the sentence “Our subject is a lot like (insert a word from the
montage) because it ”
montage) because it ...”
6. Hang the col ages on a wal and direct the group to compare them, looking for common points,
and try to identify any gaps.
Metaphoric images are often the key to genius. Aristotle wrote that whoever is the master of
metaphor is the master of thought. In Darwin’s case, his most fecund metaphor was the
branching tree of evolution, on which he could trace the rise and fal of various species. Wil iam
James, the American philosopher and psychologist, had a penchant for metaphorical y comparing
thinking processes to creeks, streams, and rivers; whereas, John Locke, one of the pioneers in
modern thinking, would focus on his falconer, whose release of a bird symbolized the quest for
human knowledge.
Metaphor Walk

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
TTake a walk around your home or workplace and the surrounding grounds. Look for

fi

objects, situations, or events that you can compare with your subject. For example, suppose your

problem is how to improve communications in your company. You take a walk and notice
potholes in the road.
How are “potholes” like your corporate communication problem? For one thing, if potholes are
not repaired, they get bigger and more dangerous.
Usual y road crews are assigned to repair the potholes. Similarly, unless something is done to
improve corporate communication, it’s likely to deteriorate even further. An idea with a similar
relation to “road crews” is to assign someone in the organization to l the role of
“communications coach.” The role would entail educating, encouraging, and supporting
communication skil s in al employees. And just as road crews are rotated, you can rotate the
assignment every six months.
The guidelines for taking a metaphor walk are
1. Take a ten- to fteen-minute walk and look for objects, events, or situations that might make
interesting metaphors with your subject.
Make a list.
2. When you return, make as many metaphors as you can between your list and your subject.
Look for similarities and similar circumstances.
3. Look for ways to transfer principles and similar circumstances from what you observed and
your subject. Try to build at least one idea or solution from each metaphor. Ask yourself what
new insights the metaphors provide as to how to solve the problem.
Metaphoric thinking helps you look at a problem in a different way. You may be able to solve it
or get a different insight by comparing it to something else and looking for similarities or similar
circumstances that you can transfer from one subject to the other. For example, if you wanted
new ideas or insights for a new product campaign, you might compare the evolution of a new
product campaign with the evolution a tree.
Photo Walk

LOOKING IN OTHER WORLDS
T-

Another way to take a metaphoric walk is take a Polaroid camera and take at least ve

pictures of visual metaphors of the subject or problem.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Then write descriptions of the metaphors. Then, for each metaphor, look for new insights or
solutions. For example, suppose you are in charge of improving the new employee training
program, and you take a photo of a building under construction. You would rst describe what is
involved in constructing a building and then transfer similarities or similar circumstances to your
training program.

If you’re working with a smal group, ask each participant to take a walk and come back with at
least ve photographs of visual metaphors. Then ask each participant to write a description of
each metaphor. Post the pictures with the written description of their metaphor posted beneath on
a card. Ask the group to tour the photo gal ery and then to build ideas or solutions from the visual
metaphors.
STRATEGY EIGHT: FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT LOOKING FOR
Whenever we attempt to do something and fail, we end up doing something else. As simplistic as
this statement may seem, it is the rst principle of the creative accident or “serendipity.” We may
ask ourselves why we have failed to do what we intended, and this is the reasonable, expected
thing to do. But the creative accident provokes a different question: What have we done?
Answering that question in a novel, unexpected way is the essential creative act. It is not luck but
creative insight of the highest order.
The discovery of the electromagnetic laws was a creative accident. The relationship between
electricity and magnetism was rst observed in 1820 by Hans Øersted in a public lecture at
which he was demonstrating the “wel -known fact” that electricity and magnetism were
completely independent phenomena. This time the experiment failed—an electric current
produced a magnetic effect. Øersted was observant enough to notice this effect, honest enough to
admit it, and diligent enough to fol ow up and publish. Maxwel used these experiments to extend
Newton’s methods of modeling and mathematical analysis in the mechanical and visible world to
the invisible world of electricity and magnetism and derived Maxwel ’s Laws, which opened the
doors to our modern age of electricity and electronics.
Even when people set out to do something purposeful y and rational y, they wind up doing things
they did not intend. John Wesley Hyatt, an Albany printer and mechanic, worked long and hard
trying to nd a substitute for bil iard-bal ivory, then coming into short supply. He invented,
instead, cel uloid—the rst commercial y successful plastic.
B. F. Skinner advised people that when they were working on something and found something
interesting, they should drop everything else and study it. In fact, he emphasized this as a rst
principle of scienti c methodology. This is what Wil iam Shockley and a multidiscipline Bel labs
team did. They were formed to invent the MOS transistor and ended up instead with the junction
transistor and the new science of semiconductor physics. These developments eventual y led to
the MOS transistor and then to the integrated circuit and to new breakthroughs in electronics and
computers. Wil iam Shockley described it as a process of “creative failure “methodology.”
What makes it possible to turn the unlooked-for event into novel fortune? We have to prepare our
minds for chance. This is dif cult to do when we are looking at a subject, because of our existing
emotions and prejudices. Consider the fol owing situation: Susan is twenty-eight years old,
single, outspoken and very bright. She majored in sociology and minored in philosophy. As a
student, she was deeply concerned with issues of racial discrimination and social justice and also
participated in antinuclear demonstrations. Which statement is the most probable?

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

A. Susan is an of ce manager.

B. Susan is an of ce manager and is active in the feminist movement.
On any rational account, it is more probable that Susan is an of ce manager than Susan is both a
of ce manager and active in the feminist movement. The probability of x, after al , is always
greater than the probability of independent event x and independent event y. Yet more than 80
percent of subjects, including those who are sophisticated in statistics, assent more readily to the
statement that Susan is an of ce manager and is active in the feminist movement than to the
statement that Susan is an of ce manager.
Asked the abstract question “Which is more probable, x alone or x and y?” subjects readily
consent that x alone is more probable. Moreover, when confronted with the apparent
contradiction between this abstract response and the Susan question, they readily admit that they
have made an error. This seems to re ect a deep- seated bias in human judgment. Given
information that Susan is a certain kind of person, subjects readily t in other events that have, in
the past, been representative of such persons, and in the process, intel ectual y ignore what they
otherwise know about probability. People are emotional y prejudiced to the likelihood that
someone with certain characteristics wil also exhibit other ones (to the extent that someone is a
social activist, she is likely to be a feminist).
To explore a subject with our intel ect, we need to wil ourselves to do so.
Exploring
Most people describe the unusual il ustration below as a group of ten circles forming a triangle,
and the three stars as a separate group. Few people spontaneously would describe the il ustration
as a six-pointed Star of David, which it represents as wel . To see the Star of David, you need to
consciously focus on it in a different way.

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

Similarly, to explore a subject with our intel ect, we need to “wil ” ourselves to direct our
attention in a different way. A tool to help you achieve this is the PMI (Plus, Minus, Interesting).
The PMI is an attention-directing tool that was rst introduced by Edward de Bono, an
international authority on thinking. It is designed to deliberately direct your attention to al the

positive, negative, and interesting aspects about your subject. Carrying out a PMI is simple.
What is not simple is to deliberately concentrate your attention in one direction after another
when your emotions and prejudices have already decided how you should feel about your
subject. In the diagram below, when an idea is emotional y rejected, al creative exploration stops.

You need to wil yourself to look in different directions. Once you have the wil to do a PMI, then
the natural chal enge to your intel igence is to nd as many positive, negative, and interesting
points as you can. Instead of using intel igence to support your emotions and prejudices, you are
now using it to explore the subject matter.

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

The guidelines for doing a PMI are

1. Make three columns on a sheet of paper. Title the columns “Plus,” “Minus,” and “Interesting.”
2. Under the “Plus” column, list al the positive aspects about the subject that you can.
3. Under the “Minus” column, list al the negative aspects that you can.
4. Under the “Interesting” column, list al those things that are worth noting but do not t under
either “Plus” or “Minus.” The “Interesting” items helps us to react to the interest in an idea and
not just to judgment feelings and emotions about the idea. “I do not like the idea but there are
interesting aspects to it....”
With the PMI, you use your intel igence to explore the subject matter. At the end of the
exploration, emotions and feelings can be used to make a decision about the matter. The
difference is that the emotions are now applied after the exploration instead of being applied
before and so preventing exploration. With a PMI, one of three things can happen:
• You may change your mind about the idea and decide that it is a viable alternative.
• You may stil reject the idea as unsound.
• You may move from the idea to another idea. By exploring the “positive” and “interesting”
aspects of an idea, you may be able to recycle it into something else.

fi

fi

fi

fl

When you put down the P, M, and I points, you react to what you put down and your feelings
change. Once a point has been thought and put down under any of the headings, that point cannot
be “unthought,” and it wil in uence the nal decision.

A while back, a group of designers brainstormed for a new umbrel a design. One of the
participants suggested a combination umbrel a with holster. The holster would be worn on a
person’s belt. A trigger mechanism in the umbrel a handle would release the spring-loaded
umbrel a when unholstered.
The group thought this was a terrible idea, because everyone would looked armed and
dangerous. They decided to do a PMI on the idea, and one of the interesting aspects they focused
on was the idea of using the umbrel a for protection. This triggered the idea of incorporating a
stun gun into the umbrel a. If attacked, one touches the attacker with the tip of the umbrel a, pul s
a trigger, and renders the attacker helpless with a nonlethal shock.
By focusing on the “interesting” aspects of the umbrel a idea, they provided themselves with
material to look at what they might not have looked for. Just as a careful y designed experiment
is an attempt to hurry along the path of logical investigation, so focusing on “interesting” aspects
of subjects is an attempt to encourage the chance appearance of ideas that would not have been
sought out.
Years back, 3M invented a new adhesive for industry. No industry was interested, and
management ordered an engineer to burn the samples. The engineer, instead, thought the
adhesive had “interesting” aspects and took some samples home. He observed his teenage
daughters setting their hair with it and using the adhesive in various other ways. He went to
management and convinced them that what they had was a consumer product, not an industrial
one, which was manufactured and marketed it as Scotch tape.
When thinking of creativity, one usual y associates it with the generation and evaluation of new,
fresh, and original ideas, but there is more to it than that. You can use your intel ect to profoundly
change the way you perceive any subject or idea through prolonged inspection, thus furthering
the creative process.
The studies of the Gestalt psychologists concluded that prolonged study of any subject wil bring
about spontaneous perceptual changes in the subject. The mind, through prolonged inspection of

a subject, becomes bored with it and wil explore alternative ways of perceiving it by
decomposing the whole into parts and looking for the interesting parts.
In the early steps of this process, the effects of these changes remain below the level of
awareness. After a while, they penetrate consciousness as new ideas and insights. Some great
artists, such as Cézanne and Rodin, often spent a long time looking at their subjects before they
painted or sculpted them. They were creatively pro ting from the disintegration of a subject into
something different, brought about by prolonged inspection.
Groups

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

An interesting exercise is to deliberately

present a valueless or dumb idea to a smal group. Ask the participants to write a paragraph
opinion (yes or no and why) of the idea on a sheet of paper. Discuss the opinions and then ask
each participant to do a PMI on the idea. Final y, combine the PMIs into one master PMI. This
forces the group to subject the idea to a prolonged inspection. You’l discover that sometimes
participants wil change their opinion or wil discover that an “interesting” aspect wil lead to some
other idea. This process is not passive but essential y active because the changes are the result of
the mind’s manipulative operations when exploring the interesting aspects of a subject. This intel
ectual exploration sometimes makes it possible to turn a valueless idea or some aspect of it into a
novel idea.

Latent Potential
Latent potential exists in every subject. We now throw out a large range of objects—from
watches to automobile tires—and buy new things, rather than x them. We rarely rebuild
materials for radical y different uses. Third World countries, out of necessity, must be more
creative and often nd a strikingly different purpose for material too worn out to perform its
original role. In Nairobi, they recycle worn tires and manufacture sandals.
Durability for sandals is a latent potential of auto tires, and the production of sandals de nes a
functional shift. The Nairobi recycling market is an example of the principle of Darwinian
continuous adaptation that led to a quirky shift of function and a new idea.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Evolution works like the Nairobi sandal makers, not like the throwaway society we live in.
Species can evolve further only by using what they have in a new and interesting way.
Organisms have no equivalent to currency for acquiring something new; they can reconstruct
only from their own innards. If organisms could not reuse old material in strikingly new ways,
how could evolution ever produce anything novel?

Similarly, every new subject or idea produces a host of creative byproducts, initial y seen as
irrelevant, but available for fashioning in novel new directions. Much of creative genius hinges
on the wil ingness to creatively observe the seemingly irrelevant and nd the latent potential.
There are six irregular shapes in the il ustration below that can be initial y seen as irrelevant.
However, you can use your imagination to fashion these irrelevant shapes into meaningful ones.
The V-shaped gures can be fashioned by your imagination to form one large triangle, or closed
opposite the apex to form three separate white triangles with an apex in each circle, or you can
form one large upside-down white triangle. You can also form a six-pointed star by combining
the large white upside-down triangle and the one formed by the Vs. Using your imagination, you
created a variety of different-sized triangles and stars out of some irrelevant shapes.

In the same way, you can take a seemingly irrelevant subject and use your imagination to nd its
latent potential and refashion it into something else. Consider the Walkman radio. Sony
engineers tried to design a smal , portable stereo tape recorder. They failed. They ended up with a
smal stereo tape player that couldn’t record. They gave up on the project and shelved it. One day
Masaru Ibuka, honorary chairman of Sony, discovered this failed product and decided to look for
its potential. He remembered an entirely different project at Sony where an engineer was
working to develop lightweight portable headphones. “What if you combine the headphones with
the tape player and leave out the recorder function altogether?”
Ibuka was mixing up functions. The idea that tape players also record was so wel established that
no one had considered reversing it. Even after Ibuka made his creative association, no one at
Sony believed they could market it. Ibuka was not discouraged and plowed ahead with what he
cal ed a new concept in entertainment. Ibuka took a failed idea and by combining, eliminating,
and reversing found the latent potential and created a brand new product. The Walkman radio
became Sony’s best-sel ing electronic product of al time and introduced al of us to “headphone
culture.”

fi

fi

fi

Ibuka took what existed (a failed product) and recycled it into something new. Similarly,
Michelangelo’s masterpiece, David, was the result of another sculptor’s failed attempt. Back in
1463, the authorities of the cathedral of Florence acquired a sixteen-foot-high chunk of white
marble to be carved into a sculpture. Two wel - known sculptors worked on the piece and gave
up, and the badly mangled block was put in storage. Other sculptors were brought in and asked
to carve a statue. They refused to work with the mangled block and demanded a new block. They
said they couldn’t possibly produce art out of the mangled block. Their demands were not
economical y feasible, so the project was scrapped by the cathedral. Forty years later,

Michelangelo took the mangled block of marble from storage and carved it into the youthful,
courageous David within eighteen months. He took what existed and sculpted it into one of the
world’s greatest statues.
Recycling
Recycling
You can recycle any subject or idea into something else by adding to or modifying it in some
fashion. During World War I , scientists at the radiation laboratory (the “Rad Lab”) at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology worked to improve radar. In the early days of 1944, Rad
Lab scientists were using a new type of radar to detect a tower at a distance of six miles, but by
spring when humidity increased, the system did not work. To their frustration, scientists
discovered that they had somehow developed a radar that was tuned to the natural frequency of
water vapor.
Rather than trashing their work, they looked for ways to modify or use this annoyance for some
other purpose. Their work developed the technology that eventual y led to the microwave oven.
E

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Examine your subject or idea for latent

potential to become something different by applying the SCAMPER checklist of questions that
were introduced on this page.
Throughout history, geniuses have demonstrated the ability to recycle an idea and transform it
into something else. For example, Francis Bacon transformed Aristotle’s inductive thinking
method into a new framework important in scienti c analysis, and Henry David Thoreau
incorporated Hindu and Buddhist ideas into his American transcendental philosophy. The famous
architect Frank Lloyd Wright took Japanese temple design principles and modi ed them to create
his spacious, airy Prairie Home.
Fortunes have been made in business by people nding the latent potential in a subject and
recycling it into something else. Researchers at 3M
developed a temporary glue that was to be used on xed surfaces, like bul etin boards (you could
move the bul etin board from one surface to another). It was not wel received on the market, and
most of the researchers lost interest in it. Arthur Frye, a 3M chemist, kept looking for ways to
recycle it into something else. One day, while he was singing in the choir of the North
Presbyterian Church in St. Paul, Minnesota, it hit him. The adhesive would be just the ticket to
keep a bookmark in place. The primary use is paper to paper, and thus, the Post-it note was born.

fi

fi

fi

fi

Think of your subject as a living, dynamic organism that is constantly evolving into something
different. In the il ustration, the pattern in Figure 1 evolves into something that looks like a

In much the same way, the latent potential in a subject may suddenly come about through a ash
of insight, in a eureka moment. Without information, the whole thing may suddenly restructure
itself to give a completely different pattern. The interesting thing is not only that a new pattern
emerges quite suddenly, but that it at once becomes obvious. This is a peculiar phenomenon. For
example, in 1956 the Jacuzzi brothers invented a whirlpool bath as a treatment for people with
arthritis. They sold a few, but essential y did little with their invention. Fifteen years later, Roy
Jacuzzi looked for the latent potential in the invention, modi ed the design, and recycled it into a
luxury bath. While the world saw the bath as an arthritic device (pattern A), Roy Jacuzzi
consciously looked for the latent potential and suddenly realized it was worth mil ions as a
luxury bath (pattern B), without any new information.
Don’t Think about It

fl

fi

fi

fi

Take a moment and imagine al the things that the gure might represent. If I asked you to list al
the different things that you imagined, I have no doubt that you would come up with several
fascinating ideas. However, if I described the gure as the rear view of a housecleaner on hands
and knees washing a oor, and then asked you to list alternative explanations, your list would be
minimal and much less creative.

fl

fl

ower in Figure 2. If you look hard enough at this pattern in Figure 2, you may suddenly see that
it could be regarded as a pile of three cubes with the top surface of the top cube marked A. If you
continue to look at it, you might see it change to a pile of three cubes with the top surface of the
top cube marked B. The thing suddenly re-restructures itself into a completely different pattern
without anything being added to it.

Once the gures are given names and meanings, it is almost impossible to look at them and have
the same perception that existed before you knew what it was. The names and meanings xate
you along a certain line of thought. ~ Like when a person hears scrambled audio but when told
what the audio is saying now only hears the words they were told.
Expertise in an area can hinder creativity by making us xated along a certain line of thought. ~
Such as a performer.
If you want to produce something creative—say a creative design for a new automobile—don’t
think of an automobile—at least not at rst. Much evidence suggests that a more abstract
de nition of a problem can lead to greater creativity and innovation than the more typical
de nitions. This is the creative strategy of some of the world’s leading creative designers,
including Kenton Wiens, architect Arthur Erickson, and Martin Skalski, director of the
transportation design sequence at Pratt Institute. Skalski, for example, doesn’t tel students to
design an automobile or study various automobile designs on the market. Instead he begins the
design process by having them create abstract compositions. Then by progressively making the
process less abstract, he eventual y has them working on the real problem, tying in the
connections between the abstract work and the nal model. - Sort of like machine learning chess
where it doesn’t use the previous human moves and then ends up getting better by leaps and
bounds by just having general rules of chess and then progressively learning by playing against
itself.
Restructuring your problem by making it more abstract helps eliminate barriers that result from
preconceived notions of what an idea or solution should be. It forces you to test assumptions and
explore possibilities. Suppose you want to improve the design of the umbrel a. If you work with
the more abstract de nition “protection from the rain,” you are more likely to explore more
possibilities, including raincoats or even a new type of town design where there are arcades
everywhere and umbrel as are no longer required. Or consider the bookstore owner, for example,
who viewed himself as a sel er of books, a very speci c idea. The trend toward the electronic
media put him out of business. On the other hand, if he had viewed himself as a provider of
information and entertainment, a more abstract characterization, a switch in the medium would
not have been threatening and would have opened up new opportunities.
The mind makes ruts very quickly, and even more so when it stal s and spins its wheels. Making
your problem more abstract may suddenly create a space between thoughts sunk in the details of
some perception. Instead of getting mired down classifying the mite or fungus, Darwin asked the
grand question “What is life?”

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

The guidelines for using the principle of

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

abstraction are

1 Describe an abstract de nition of your problem What is the principle of the problem? What is
its essence?
Example: Our problem is how to protect rural designer mailboxes from theft and vandalism. The
principle is protection. 2. Brainstorm for several ideas on protection. Think of ways to protect
things.
• Place in a bank.
• Rustproof it.
• Provide good maintenance.
• Get an insurance policy.
• Hide it.
3. After you’ve generated a number of different ideas, restate the problem so that it is slightly
less abstract. Again, generate as many solutions as you can. Example: Think of ways to protect
things that are outside and vulnerable.
• Hire a guard.
• Watch it constantly.
• Drape it with camou age.
• Put a fence around it.
• Keep it wel lighted.
4. Final y, consider the real problem. Review the ideas and solutions to the two previous
abstractions and use these as stimuli to generate solutions.
Example: The real problem is how to protect rural mailboxes from theft and vandalism. The idea
triggered from “get an insurance policy” is to offer an insurance policy to owners of rural
mailboxes: $5 a year or $10 for three years to cover the mailbox from theft or destruction.
Alexander Graham Bel was inspired to start development of the telephone when he read an
account, written in German, describing an invention that he thought had the function of a
telephone. After demonstrating his working telephone, Bel learned that, because of the language
barrier, he had misunderstood the report, and the German invention had an entirely different
function. The German account was the stimuli that broke his preconceived notion of a telephone
and inspired him to think in a different direction. In the same way, ideas and solutions to abstract
de nitions wil provide you the stimuli to break your preconceptions.

fi

fl

fi

Groups

Arthur Erickson, architect and designer,

uses an abstraction thinking strategy with his students to help them avoid visual and functional
preconceptions and unlock creativity. For example, if he is looking for a new chair design, he wil
rst ask his students to draw a gure in motion.
Then he wil ask them to build a model (wood, plastic, metal, paper) of a structure that supports
that gure in motion. Final y, he wil have them use the model as a stimulus for a new chair
design.
Fol owing are guidelines for using this thinking strategy in a group situation to reduce their
preconceptions about any problem: 1. Describe an abstract de nition of the problem. Ask the
group to generate and list solutions and ideas.
Example: Think of ways to store things.
2. Describe a slightly less abstract de nition. Again, ask the group to generate solutions and
ideas.
Example: Think of ways to stack things.
3. Describe an even slightly less abstract de nition. Again, ask the group for solutions and ideas.
Example: Think of ways to organize large objects.
4. Introduce the real problem. Ask the group to review al previous ideas and solutions and to use
them as stimuli to generate ideas and solutions for the real problem. Example: Now use these
ideas as stimuli to improving a parking garage.

T-

Another way to bene t from abstractions is to start with a speci c solution or idea and

progressively make it more abstract by asking the provocative question “What real y matters?”
whereupon the problem is reconsidered at a higher level of abstraction and reformulated. Repeat
this kind of questioning (“What real y matters?”) two or three times in order to see the problem
from different angles. For example, you come up with the idea of shredding packing material as
a better way of disposing of it. Asking “What real y matters?” you decide that what real y matters
is to reduce the amount of packing material. The idea you come up with is to use thinner packing
material. Asking “What real y matters?” again, you decide that what real y matters is to reduce
the number of packages. This level of abstraction leads you to think of alternatives to packages
such as re l able, self-serviceable dispensers and standardized containers to be re l ed at the
point of sale and so on.
Are Your Ideas Crazy Enough?

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

When people use their imaginations to develop new ideas, those ideas are heavily structured in
predictable ways by existing categories and concepts. This is true for scientists, artists, inventors,
politicians, and businesspeople. Consider the fol owing accident, which was reported in The
American Railroad Journal in 1835:

fi

fi

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

As a train was approaching the depot at Paterson, an axle of the leading car gave way, which
overturned that and the fol owing two cars.
None of the passengers were injured, though they felt the shock by the concussion. Mr. Speer,
the conductor, a very industrious and sober man, was seated on the car at the break, and
unfortunately was crushed to death under the load.
Mr. Speer was the only casualty. What factors contributed to his untimely death? Certainly there
was the immediate cause-the breaking of the axle and the overturning of the cars—but there is a
subtler cause as wel . Note that Mr. Speer was riding on the car, not in it, and that none of the
passengers, who were inside, were hurt. Why was he not in the car? What in the world was he
doing on top of the car? Speer’s death was the result of a design aw that required conductors to
ride on the outside of cars.
This aw is an example of the phenomenon of structured imagination. Early designs for railway
cars were heavily in uenced by the properties of the stagecoach, the most common vehicle of the
day. The rst railway cars were little more than stagecoaches with tracks, with no central aisle
and designed so that conductors had to ride outside on running boards. The idea of a central aisle
was considered odd and even unsanitary, based on the notion that it would become one long
spittoon. Final y, as was true of stagecoaches, the brakes were located on the outside and were
operated by the conductor, who was seated on the top front of the car.
We would not consider the developers of the railroads to be unimaginative people. On the
contrary, they were visionaries who saw the railroad as the transportation of the future long
before other people took the idea seriously. Yet, even after a number of conductors had been kil
ed, there was strong resistance to designing the railway cars so conductors could ride safely
inside. As late as 1866, according to the Railroad and Engineering Journal (1887), seventy-two
trainmen were kil ed in fal s from cars in Massachusetts, New York, and Michigan alone.
What this suggests is that even highly creative individuals and the ideas they develop are
susceptible to the constraining in uences of structured imagination. The design for a railway car
was heavily in uenced by what they knew, understood, and were most familiar with—the
stagecoach.
Even Thomas Edison’s idea for an electric lighting distribution system is an example of an idea
that was the result of structured imagination. His reliance on the existing gas distribution system
at the time led to his stubborn reliance on the problematic procedure of running wires
underground, just as gas mains ran underground. More recently, the fact that many modern
computer terminals display exactly eighty columns of text is a direct outgrowth from the era
when we literal y fed data into computers by way of eighty-column punch cards.
The playful openness of creative geniuses is what al ows them to explore “interesting” chance
events. In genius, there is a tolerance for unpredictable avenues of thought.

fl

fi

fl

fl

fl

fi

fl

Paul Cézanne, the father of modern painting, coined a wonderful phrase that captures the whole
paradoxical process of mixing unpredictable thinking and intentional tactics. He cal ed the
creator’s creative activity “making a nd.”

You can actively seek the accidental

discovery by deliberately exploring the odd and unusual. It is this freedom from design or
commitment that al ows you to juxtapose things that would not otherwise have been arranged in
this way, to construct a sequence of events that-would not otherwise have been constructed. A
technique to help you deliberately seek the odd and unusual is the fol owing:
. List several absurd or crazy ideas about your problem. Try to make each one more bizarre than
the last.
Problem: A greeting card company wants new products and new markets. Absurd Ideas:
• Send greeting cards to dead people.
• Send heavy stones as greeting cards.
• Send cards COD.
• Send the person money with the message to “go out and buy your own greeting card.” • Send a
spider.
2. Select one of the absurd ideas.
Absurd Idea: Send greeting cards to dead people.
3. Extract the principle. What is the principle of the absurd idea?
Principle: Communicating with the departed.
4. List the features and aspects of the absurd idea.
Features, Aspects:
• People communicate with the dead through séances.
• People leave owers at cemeteries.
• People leave poems, letters, and other artifacts.
• People publish personal poems, messages, etc., in newspapers to the departed. • People pray for
the departed.
• People communicate with Ouija boards, etc.
5. Imagineering. Extract the principle or one of the features and aspects and build it into a
practical idea. Example: “Leaving items at the cemetery.”
Imagineered Idea: The idea the greeting card company created was to publish memoriam cards
on sticks so they can be inserted in the ground at the gravesite. The “cards-on-sticks” are sold in
orist shops that are located near cemeteries.
What is especial y remarkable about a hologram is that if a laser light is shined on just a smal
part of it, the entire image stil appears. Thus, a smal portion of the hologram contains
information about the entire image. In a similar sense, when you focus on one smal “interesting”
aspect of a bizarre idea, that one smal aspect contains enough information to create a new idea.

fl

fl

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

In our example, the aspect of people “leaving items at the cemetery” contained enough
information to create a whole new product line.
More often the danger is not one of overawareness of an idea, but of neglect of ways of looking
at things that are blotted out by a dominant idea.
Groups

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

To use this thinking strategy in a large

group, rst divide the group into four teams. If you have a smal group, especial y if you have
only four members, you can modify this technique easily. Just have one group member write an
idea in each of the cel s. If you have more than four people, have them double up to l in the
boxes.
1. Each group gets a sheet that is divided into four boxes: A through D.
2. Each team l s in cel A with an absurd, crazy, or fantastical idea. Encourage the group to come
up with the craziest idea possible. When each team has completed cel A, the sheets are circulated
to a neighboring group.
’
3 The groups examines the rst idea in cel A and engineers the idea into something that s more
realistic and feasible The group writes that idea in cel B and passes
3. The groups examines the rst idea in cel A and engineers the idea into something that’s more
realistic and feasible. The group writes that idea in cel B and passes the worksheet to another
group.
4. The next group works with the information in both cel s A and B and tries to develop an idea
that’s even more realistic and feasible. The group writes the idea in cel C and then passes the
worksheet to the nal group.
5. After three passes, the sheets stop with the nal team, which has to use the information in al
the cel s to develop a nal idea to be written in cel D. The nal ideas are then presented to the
whole group.

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Example: A group of salespeople brainstormed on how to sel more cars. The rst team wrote
“Marry every potential customer” in cel A. The next team wrote “Send special event cards such
as birthday, Christmas, and anniversary cards” in cel B. The third team wrote “Send a ower
with a special discount to married couples on their anniversary” in cel C. The idea that was nal
y presented was to l the trunk of a newly sold car with owers and to personal y deliver it.

When the owner checks out the car and opens the trunk, the owner is overwhelmed and tel s his
or her friends and relatives about the dealership.

Unrelated Ideas Game

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Scientists have discovered that when they

presented people with con icting or incongruous information, the subjects’ alertness increased.
They concluded that this kind of con ict can be a source of creative drive. The fol owing is a
game designed to increase your group’s alertness by using unrelated ideas. The guidelines are
1. The facilitator forms two smal groups.
2. The problem statement is written down for al participants to see and is read aloud by the
facilitator.
Example: How do we increase corporate productivity?
3. The game begins by having a member from the rst group suggest an idea that is “unrelated”
to the problem.
Example: A member might suggest that the company should give each employee one mil ion dol
ars.
4. The second group is told that it has three minutes to turn the unrelated idea into a practical
solution to the original problem.

fi

fl

fi

fl

Example: A lottery modeled after mil ion-dol ar lotteries. Get a rol of numbered tickets. Each
time an employee provides a speci c suggestion on how to increase productivity, reward him or

her with one ticket. At the end of one month, read the ideas and draw a number from a bowl. The
winning ticket gets a prize. If there is no winner, double the prize for next month.
5. The facilitator judges the idea. The second group is awarded one point if the solution is judged
practical and successful by the facilitator; if the solution is judged unsuccessful, the rst group
gets the point.
6. The facilitator writes down al the solutions as they are proposed.
7. The groups reverse roles, and the second group proposes an unrelated idea that the rst group
develops into an idea. The solutions are judged. The groups continue to reverse roles until the
game ends.
8. After thirty to forty- ve minutes, the game is terminated and the group with the most points is
declared the winner.
9. Final y, the facilitator has the group discuss and elaborate on al the proposed solutions to see
which ones have the most value.
We have the habit of concentrating on a problem to the exclusion of al other matters. This habit
of thinking effectively prevents the formation of new ideas. Al outside in uences, including
chance in uences, which could lead to new ways of thinking about the problem, are deliberately
excluded. Concentration on the problem only serves to reinforce the rigid way it is being
considered at the moment. Bringing in unrelated ideas as an outside in uence breaks this
concentration and gives you fresh ways of thinking about the problem.
Fantasy

Another way to bring in an outside in uence is to fantasize about your subject. The dynamic
principle of fantasy is play, which belongs also to the child and appears to be inconsistent with
the principle of serious work. Yet, the psychologist Carl Jung noted that without this playing with
fantasy, no creative work has ever yet come to birth. It is no coincidence that geniuses take a
childlike delight in painting, or composing, or searching for a grand uni ed theory of the
universe. Creative geniuses tend to return to the conceptual world of childhood and are able to
wed the most advanced understandings of a eld with the sensibilities of a wonder- l ed child.
Because Einstein could fantasize about space and time, he was able to join his childlike wonder
with his scienti c expertise in his search for new theories and new ways to understand the
universe. While his col eagues kept busy working with what was known, he would wonder why
empty space doesn’t weigh anything.

fl

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fl

fi

fl

fi

fi

fl

A CEO was disappointed in his food-service product line. Playful y, he asked his engineers and
chemists to fantasize about products that are impossible to create today, but if they were possible,
would change the nature of the food industry forever. One “impossible” idea they imagined was
the idea of a food machine, a machine in which you pour universal ingredients (wheat, soy, our,
etc.) and the machine would provide you with any imaginable meal. You simply dial “eggs and

bacon” or “turkey dinner with al the trimmings for ten,” or whatever you wish, and the machine
prepares and serves it. He then asked them to look for practical ideas and ways to come as close
to that “impossibility” as possible. The chemists realized there were certain foods, such as breads
and pasta, that could be created by machines today. This insight led to the development of the
home bread-baking appliance.
Fantasy Envelopes

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Fol owing is a game that al ows a group

to fantasize about impossibilities, resources, and super powers. The guidelines are 1. Divide the
group into three teams.
Each team gets an envelope with one of the fol owing questions. Team A gets Question 1, team B
gets Question 2, and team C gets Question 3. Question 1: “What is impossible to do today, but if
it were possible, would change the nature of the problem forever?”
Question 2: “What would I do if I had al the resources (money, people, time, facilities, etc.) in
the world to solve this problem?”
Question 3: “If I were a superhero with supernatural powers and could accomplish anything I
wish, how would I handle this problem?”
2. Each team writes an idea or answer on the outside of an envelope. The envelopes are then
passed to another team. Their team writes an immediate, speci c action that can be taken today
to work toward the idea or answer that’s written on the outside of the envelope. The idea or
suggestion is written on a card and put into the envelope. The envelopes are passed from team to
team until each team has had an opportunity to include their ideas and suggestions. Each team
generates a speci c action for each envelope without looking at what others have written.
Discuss and evaluate al the ideas and suggestions at the end.
There is a great value in fantasizing about subjects that do not yet exist. The fantasies take us out
of the normal perceptual patterns and place our minds in an unstable position, from which we
can “move” to a new idea. We can also fantasize about subjects that could “never” exist in
experience.
Crossbreeding Subjects

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

One way to create subjects that could

fi

fi

never exist is to crossbreed two subjects from two different worlds. By actively merging two

separate subjects into the same space, you articulate a new identity. This new identity wil
encourage you to think of connecting links and plausible circumstances to express them. The
guidelines are
1. Take your subject or some aspect of it and crossbreed it with a subject from some other world
to create a new creature. What happens when you crossbreed X with Y? What happens when you
crossbreed your boss with an orange? Or your restaurant with a water buffalo?
Suppose you wanted to improve the employee training program. Think about what happens when
you crossbreed: • The trainee with a pickle
• The trainee with a door
• The trainee with a cowboy
• The trainee with a watermelon
• The trainee with a horse
• The trainee with a commuter
2. Draw a picture of your creature. Consider the fol owing:
• How does it relate to its environment?
• Who is important in its life?
• What is important in its life?
• What is the creature’s biggest chal enge? • At what does it excel?
•If it could have one problem, what would it be?
• How does if feel about you?
3. Write a two- or three-paragraph story about your creature. If you prefer, just outline it.
4. What are three of its unique strengths?
5. What are three of its unique weaknesses?
6. Create ideas from these crossbreed strengths?
7. Think about the weaknesses. Think about something that can reduce one of the weaknesses.
Apply that thought to the problem to create a new idea.
8. Recal your problem.
9. Reread your story.
10. Some images or thoughts from your story wil lead to new ideas about your problem.
An owner of a Chinese restaurant crossbred “a restaurant with a cat.” One of the strengths of this
creature was its ability to go to the customers.
This led to the idea of sending his staff to the commuter railroad station, where they passed out
menus in the morning to commuters. Each menu had an 800 number and the commuters were
advised to place their orders by phone before they left the city. When the commuters arrived back
at the station, their meals were ready for pick up.
Chance Favors the Prepared Mind

Alexander Fleming was studying deadly bacteria in 1928 when he removed the cover of the
culture plate and noticed that it had become accidental y contaminated. A mold formed on the
exposed culture. Fleming noticed that in the area surrounding the mold, the bacteria had
disappeared. This was the clue that a lowly mold was a powerful microbe kil er that did not harm
human tissue. He worked with this mold and tested it on laboratory animals. His work led to the
discovery of penicil in, which has saved mil ions of lives. He attributed his discovery to the
“greatest”
chance. However, it was his years of diligent research and observation that prepared him to
notice the chance event. A less-prepared scientist would have thrown the accidental y
contaminated culture away.
In one sense, the creative process starts with al the prior knowledge and experiences that the
individual has had that could affect his or her attitude toward creativity and innovation, as wel as
his or her receptivity to ideas that involve the creative solution.
n another example, Ray Kroc, a man in his fties, spent his adult life preparing himself for the
right business opportunity. He constantly looked for it in real estate and sales. He was sel ing
milkshake mixers when he accidental y stumbled into a little hamburger stand owned by Dick
and Maurice McDonald. The McDonalds had simpli ed, economized, and minimized the
hamburger stand and had developed a stunning business. Kroc realized immediately that the
McDonalds had unwittingly hit upon the concept of fast food—homogenized, predictable items
that are quick and easy to prepare. Kroc formed a partnership to franchise the concept, and
within a few years, became one of the richest men in America. Consider the thousands of
entrepreneurs who had pul ed into the hamburger stand and were not prepared to see the
staggering potential of the McDonald brothers’ fast-food concept.
Louis Pasteur, the French chemist who founded microbiology and invented the process of
pasteurization, once warned that chance favors only the prepared mind. Alexander Fleming was
intel ectual y prepared to notice the clue that led to penicil in, and Ray Kroc was experiential y
prepared to recognize the business concept that would change food service in America. The
chance events that inspired their discoveries were seen hundreds of times by others. Fleming was
not the rst scientist to see a petri dish spoiled by mold, and Kroc was not the rst to stumble
into the McDonalds’ hamburger stand. Yet, because they were prepared, Fleming saw the farreaching implications of the mold, and Kroc saw the incredible potential for a new food industry.
Their preparation made their serendipitous discoveries highly probable.

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Sometimes chance is dramatic and

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

sometimes chance arrives as a faint clue. The more information and data you have, the greater
your chance of discovering and exploiting the chance event that may lead to a breakthrough idea.
Fol owing are some techniques designed to help you nd those clues in some demographic,

social, technological, or economic fact or trend that may lead to a new idea: Opportunity
Headlines
Brainstorm for as many interesting demographic, social, technological, or economic facts or
trends that you can imagine. Print them on cards—
one fact or trend per card. Then string sets of cards together to form headlines that tel a story
about something that wil , could, or should happen in your own situation. For example, four
trends—increased use of credit cards, growing value of brand equity, rising number of Internet
users, and ability to use technology to do speci c market segmentation—are used to develop the
fol owing headline: “It’s possible to bypass retailers to sel brand name merchandise on the Web.”
After developing a set of ten or so headlines, try to gure out the implications of each likely
development and take a disciplined look at the capabilities and assets your company has or must
get if it’s to exploit the opportunities.
~ Can Use 50 headlines tricks in combination with this…
Chance Arrangements

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Igor Stravinsky, one of the giants in

twentieth-century musical composition, in the course of his labors, would deliberately try to
draw inspiration from some accidental arrangement. He made pro table use out of accidental
arrangements of notes. To contrive an accidental arrangement of facts and trends is to, again,
write facts and trends on cards—one fact or trend per card. Create as many cards as you can.
Shuf e them and draw three or four at random and place them face down. Turn them over, face
up, and build a new idea out of the arrangement. If necessary, l in the gaps or rearrange the
cards until a particular arrangement seems signi cant or inspiring.
Groups

FINDING WHAT YOU’RE NOT
LOOKING FOR T -

Give each participant six blank cards and

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fl

ask him or her to print an interesting fact, trend, or future possibility about your subject
(company, market, new markets, etc.) on each card, one per card. After ve minutes or so, col ect
the cards and shuf e them. Then, 1. Randomly distribute three cards to each participant. Make
sure no one gets his or her own cards. Ask everyone to study the cards and arrange them in order
of personal interest. While participants do this, spread the leftover cards on a large table.

2. Ask participants to exchange the cards they don’t like with those on the table. Al ow a few
minutes for this activity.
3. Ask participants to exchange cards with each other. Every participant must exchange at least
one card and may exchange any number.
4. Ask participants to discuss their cards with each other and to form teams. There is no limit to
the number of participants who may join the same team, but no team can keep more than three
cards.
5. Instruct each team to build an idea from the three cards that your company can exploit.
STRATEGY NINE: AWAKENING THE COLLABORATIVE SPIRIT
The physicist, David Bohm, while researching the lives of Einstein, Heisenberg, Pauli, and Bohr,
made a remarkable observation. Bohm noticed that their incredible breakthroughs took place
through simple, open, and honest conversation. He observed, for instance, that Einstein and his
col eagues spent years freely meeting and conversing with each other. During these interactions,
they exchanged ideas and talked about ideas that later became the foundations of modern
physics. They discussed ideas without trying to change the others’ minds and without bitter
argument. They felt free to propose whatever was on their minds. They always paid attention to
each others’ views and established an extraordinary professional fel owship. This freedom to
discuss without risk led to the breakthroughs that physicists today take for granted. ~ this is a
cultural aspect of my company that I want in particular.
*The Spirit of Koinonia*
Einstein and his friends il ustrate the staggering potential of col aborative thinking. The notion
that open and honest col aboration al ows thinking to grow as a col ective phenomenon can be
traced back to Socrates and other thinkers in ancient Greece. Socrates and his friends so revered
the concept of group dialogue that they bound themselves by principles of discussion that they
established to maintain a sense of col egiality. These principles were known as “Koinonia,”
which means “spirit of fel owship.” The principles they established were
• Establish Dialogue. In Greek, the word “dialogue” means a “talking through.” The Greeks
believed that the key to establishing dialogue is to exchange ideas without trying to change the
other person’s mind. This is not the same as discussion, which from its Latin root means to “dash
to pieces.” The basic rules of dialogue for the Greeks were “Don’t argue,” “Don’t interrupt,” and
“Listen careful y.”
• Clarify Your Thinking. To clarify your thinking, you must suspend al untested assumptions.
Being aware of your assumptions and suspending them al ows thought to ow freely. Free
thought is blocked if we are unaware of our assumptions or unaware that our thoughts and
opinions are based on assumptions. For instance, if you believe that certain people are not
creative, you’re not likely to give their ideas fair consideration.

fl

Check your assumptions about everything and try to maintain an unbiased view.

• Be Honest. Say what you think, even if your thoughts are controversial.
The ancient Greeks believed these principles al owed thinking to grow as a col ective
phenomenon. Koinonia al owed a group to access a larger pool of common thoughts that cannot
be accessed individual y. A new kind of mind begins to come into being that is based on the
development of common thoughts. People are no longer in opposition. They become participants
in a pool of common ideas, which are capable of constant development and change.
The notion that the col ective intel igence of a group is larger than the intel igence of an
individual can be traced back to primitive times when hunter-gather bands would meet to discuss
and solve common problems. It is commonly understood and accepted practice. What’s dif cult
is the wil ingness of a group to discipline itself to brainstorm for ideas openly and productively.
There are many problems with traditional brainstorming. Sessions can be undercut by group
uniformity pressures and perceived threats from managers and bosses.
Other sessions fail because people nd it dif cult to avoid judging and evaluating ideas as they
are offered. Personality differences also come into play: Some people are natural y wil ing to
talk; while others tend to be silent.
Il ustrated are two circles of equal size. Circle A symbolical y represents the creative forces (the
black arrows) of a group brainstorming in an uninhibiting environment. Whereas, Circle B
represents the creative forces in an inhibiting environment. Circle A is expanding and liberating
creative thought, whereas Circle B is contracting and restricting creative thought. The restrictive
nature of the forces in Circle B even make the circle appear smal er than it is (they are identical
in size). Which brainstorming group would you prefer to join?

fi

fi

fi

Al of us had a taste of good group brainstorming sessions at some time in our lives that provided
ideas and thoughts we could never have imagined in advance. But these experiences come rarely
and are usual y the product of certain conditions. Fol owing are suggested conditions that help
overcome these attitudes by enhancing “Koinonia” in your brainstorming sessions: Participants

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

Jonas Salk, developer of the vaccine that eradicated polio, made it a standard practice to

assemble men and women from very different domains to interact during his group sessions. He
felt this practice helped him bring out new ideas that could not arise in the minds of individuals
who were from the same domain.
Consider the weaving together of people from different disciplines that led to the discovery of
DNA’s structure. The successful col aboration included James Watson (microbiologist), Maurice
Wilkins (X-ray crystal ographer), Francis Crick (physicist), and Linus Pauling (chemist). Their
different styles of work were a key aspect to the discovery.
The ideal brainstorming group should be diverse, including experts, nonexperts, and people from
different domains within the organization. For example, a marketing group brainstorming for
new marketing ideas could invite a customer, someone from manufacturing, an engineer, and a
receptionist to the meeting.
Collegiality
Al participants must regard one another as equal col eagues, even if they have nothing in
common. When you look at the dots in the il ustration, your attention is drawn to the lone dot
that stands separate and apart from the group of dots.
In the same way, if a participant feels that he or she is not an equal col eague with the rest of a
brainstorming group, that participant wil become the focus of the session, either consciously or
unconsciously, and inhibit the creativity of the group.

Thinking of each other as col eagues is important because thought is participative. Just the wil
ingness to consciously think of each other as col eagues contributes toward interacting as col
eagues. We talk differently and more honestly with friends than we do with people who are not
friends. Any control ing authority, no matter how careful y presented, wil tend to inhibit the free
play of thought. If one person is used to having his or her view prevail because he or she is the
most senior person present, then that privilege must be surrendered in advance. If one person is
used to withholding ideas because he or she is more junior, then the security of “keeping quiet”
must also be surrendered.

Suspending All Assumptions
Col egial col aboration is a process we must come to understand and work hard toward. The
dif culty of effective col aboration has been demonstrated by several experiments conducted by
Howard Gruber and his associates at the University of Geneva. In one experiment, he
demonstrates a box that al ows two people to peer into it and see the shadow cast by what is to
them an unknown object. Because of the angle, each viewer sees a different shape to the shadow.
Their task is to share the information about what they see in order to identify the object casting
the shadow. For instance, if a cone is placed in the box, one viewer sees a circle, the other a
triangle.
The idea was to encourage the viewers to col aborate like two astronomers taking a x on the
heavens from different positions. They see the world in slightly different ways; they take
respectful advantage of the fact that one sees it from here and the other from there; and they put
together a richer, more soundly based idea of what is real y out there than either one could reach
alone.
But the opposite happened. Each viewer assumed their view was the correct one and that the
other person was apparently confused, blind, or crazy. “How can you see a triangle? I see a
circle.” This was true of highly intel igent, educated adults. The assumptions made by the
viewers made it dif cult to col aborate about even a simple object, like a cone.
In order to give fair value to ideas, the group col ectively must free themselves of al
preconceptions and suspend al assumptions. Suspending assumptions al ows one to look at new
ideas in an unbiased way. It is undeniable that by the sheer power of his imagination, Einstein
suspended al assumptions that other physicists made about the world and completely reoriented
reality. Once one makes assumptions that this is the way it is, al creative thought stops. The
group’s agreement and discipline of suspending assumptions is key to unblocking the col ective
imagination.
Suspending Judgment
In an atomic pile, an explosion is prevented by inserting rods of cadmium that mop up the
particles that are shooting around. In this way, the energy in the pile is control ed. If there are too
many rods, the chain reaction stops, and the pile can no longer produce any energy. People who
are unable to appreciate new ideas are like the rods: When a group gets too many of them, it
becomes impossible to generate creative energy, and the group wil shut down. Require everyone
to suspend al criticism and judgment until after the idea generation stage. Whenever someone
says,
“Yes, but ...,” require the participant to change “Yes, but ...” to “Yes, and ...” and continue where
the last person left off. This simple change from the negative to the positive wil help change the
psychology of the group.

fi

fi

fi

Environment

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

Hold your meetings in a risk-free zone where people can speak their minds without fear

of criticism or ridicule. Encourage people to say what they are thinking, even if their thoughts are
radical or controversial. Once people realize they can speak freely without being judged or
ridiculed, they become comfortable and open. As soon as participants become concerned with
“who said what” or “not saying something stupid,” creativity is retarded.
Play classical music when people are thinking. Music can be a powerful catalyst in the creative
process. It puts participants into a peaceful state of mind, which facilitates re ection. Einstein’s
son once re ected that whenever Einstein came to a dif cult situation in his work, he would take
refuge in the music of Beethoven and Mozart, and that the music would exhilarate him and help
him resolve his dif culties.
Make the environment visual y stimulating by posting pictures and diagrams that are relevant to
the subject around the room. For example, suppose you wanted to design a car for upwardly
mobile families. You might start by putting together a wal -sized board of photographs and
drawings. Use pictures to answer some questions such as “What kinds of houses do these car
buyers live in?” “What kind of watches do they buy?”
“Where do they go on vacation?” “What kind of art do they hang on their wal s?” Mix your own
idea sketches in among them. As the swarm of pictures grows, an understanding of who is going
to buy this car and what might appeal to them begins to emerge.
Playfulness
One of Walt Disney’s greatest secrets was his ability to draw out the inner child in his business
associates and combine it with their business acumen. Because he made the work playlike, his
associates worked and played together with a missionary zeal. Disney was a true genius who
needed to col aborate with other people to express his concepts. Disney got the creative col
aboration he needed by consciously creating a humorous and playful environment.
An environment of playfulness and humor is highly conducive to creativity. Playfulness relaxes
the tension in a group. In a state of relaxation, individuals show less xation and rigidity in their
thinking. Consequently, a playful group wil lose its inhibitions about combining dissimilar
concepts and ideas and looking for hidden similarities. These actions are highly conducive to
creative thinking, and consequently, a group wil generate a much wider range of options than
would otherwise be considered.

fl

fi

fi

fi

fl

When we play, we become childlike and begin to behave in spontaneous creative ways. Play and
creativity have much in common. In particular, play often involves using objects and actions in
new or unusual ways, similar to the imaginative combinations of ideas involved in creative
thinking.

Picasso once remarked that he became a true artist when he learned how to paint like a child.
Einstein has been described as the perennial child and was very much aware of the paral els
between creative-thinking thought patterns and those of playful children. Einstein suggested to
Piaget that he investigate the way children think of speed and time, thereby inspiring one of the
psychologist’s most il uminating lines of research.
*Facilitator*
A skil ed facilitator is essential to the process of brainstorming. In the absence of a skil ed
facilitator, habits of thought wil pul the group toward critical, judgmental thinking and away
from productive, creative thinking. The skil ed facilitator should have strong interpersonal skil s,
understand the principles of pro uent and exible thinking, and be able to paraphrase and nd
analogies for suggestions. The facilitator is often a good curator, keeping the group focused,
eliminating distractions, and keeping creative thinking alive by liberating the group from trivial
and bureaucratic thinking.
The facilitator is not a creator in the same sense that the others are. Rather, the facilitator is the
steward, whose job is to liberate the creative thinking of the group. Robert Oppenheimer
facilitated the Manhattan Project that developed the atomic bomb during World War I .
Oppenheimer couldn’t do the individual thinking and tasks required to make the bomb, but he
was able to conduct the group of diverse talents and considerable egos, like a great conductor.
His facilitation generated the openness and free exchange of information that enabled the group
to negotiate a solution. Great facilitators may not be able to compose a Beethoven symphony, but
they have an understanding and appreciation of the work and can create the environment needed
to realize it.
Stating the Problem

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

The facilitator should post a common problem statement. It’s a good idea at this stage for

the facilitator to ask each participant to come up with his or her own personal way of seeing the
problem and his or her dream or wishful solution. Engaging participants to look at the problem in
a personal way is important for the fol owing reasons:
• Each participant makes the problem his or her own. They can preserve their own individuality
and need not to be forced into a shared consensus. • Engaging participants takes advantage of the
diversity of the group.
• Al owing participants to engage in wishful thinking at this point enables the participant to
broaden his or her perspective.
• By analyzing wishes as given, they can be broken down into parts of problems that can be dealt
with separately.

fi

fl

fl

Idea Production

Quantity breeds quality. The goal is to empty the box. Get every idea from each participant that
he or she is capable of imagining. When brainstorming for ideas, suspend al judgment and
criticism of ideas and strive for quantity of ideas. Encourage freewheeling and piggybacking.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TTwo ways to increase idea production are

• When you send out an agenda for a brainstorming meeting, ask everyone to bring three new
ideas as the ticket of admittance to the meeting.
• Give the group an idea quota. For example, an idea quota of 200 ideas forces the group to put
their internal critics on hold and list al ideas, including the obvious and weak. The rst third
wil be the same old ideas they always get. The second third wil be more interesting, and the
last third wil show more imagination and complexity.
Elaboration
Picasso’s masterpiece, Guernica, demonstrates quite clearly that Picasso was stating a
contradiction but a plain fact when he said that a picture remains intact from its rst inspiration
and yet is not thought out beforehand. He was indicating that the creative process is a holistic
one, like the birth and development of a living
n nature, the nal form of an oak tree or human being is given from the seed at the outset, and
yet the form is also shaped as it grows. In the same way, he had an inspiration for Guernica, but
he explored different expressions and dimensions with sixty- ve different sketches before it
evolved into its nal form.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

The longer you work to improve and modify ideas, the more likely it is that the solution

wil be original and appropriate. Because Picasso kept changing his techniques as he painted
Guernica, his painting developed into an original masterpiece. Extend the group’s thinking by
encouraging them to elaborate on the existing ideas in some way. Ask what can be substituted,
combined, adapted, magni ed, modi ed, put to some other use, eliminated, rearranged, or
reversed in the existing ideas?
Clarifying Thinking

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

Sigmund Freud believed that you clarify thinking and reasoning not so much by searching for
“right” answers, but rather by asking better questions. Good questions widen our understanding
of a subject. Often, through questioning, Freud would end up discovering something he didn’t set
out to discover.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

A technique that is helpful for problem solvers in a group to clarify their reasoning is the

TQR (Thinker-Questioner-Re ector) technique. Any speaker or listener can cal for a TQR
session at any time during the session. The person with the idea is designated the Thinker. One
person from the group is designated the Questioner. Al others become Re ectors. For a speci ed
period of time ( ve minutes or so), the Thinker thinks out loud, prompted by questions by the
Questioner. Then the Re ectors offer any re ections, ideas, or extensions from the interchange.
At the least, the idea gets a ful hearing and questioners feel they have had a chance to clarify and
understand the idea.
Recording

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

The usual method of recording in a brainstorming session is for the facilitator to list the

ideas on a ip chart or chalkboard in a shared display to create a group memory. Shared displays
achieve maximal value when the display is more structured than a simple listing of al ideas. Try
using generative graphics, such as wal - mounted scrol s of paper. Record the ideas with a
cartoon, diagram, or printed phrase, using colored felt markers. The idea is to stimulate ful and
energetic participation, and to nd colorful, stimulating, and graphic ways to portray ideas and il
ustrate the group’s thinking.
Try recording by posting the ideas on a wal or chalkboard in clusters using Post-it notes. Post-it
notes make ideas movable and facilitate the
“clustering of ideas.” When ideas are grouped by common characteristics or themes, an
organization or structure begins to arise from the information. More ideas are generated as
people begin to see structure and l in gaps. A sense of priority or dominance is often revealed as
one or more of the clusters claim the interest of the group.
Evaluation

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TAt the end of a brainstorming session, make three lists: ideas of immediate usefulness,

fi

fl

fl

fi

fi

fl

fl

fi

fl

areas for further exploration, and new approaches to the problem. The facilitator can then
categorize the ideas alone, or he or she can have the group evaluate the ideas by voting on the
most useful.

A col aborative brainstorming session that re ects Koinonia al ows the group to grow a new kind
of col ective mind based on the development of common thoughts. People are no longer in
opposition. They become participants in a pool of common ideas, which are capable of constant
development and change.
Group Brainstorming Techniques
Col aboration is one of the best kept secrets in creativity. Even some of the artists that we think
of as solitary geniuses were actual y entrepreneurial leaders of art teams. Historian Wil iam E.
Wal ace discovered that thirteen people col aborated with Michelangelo on the Sistine Chapel
and around two hundred people assisted the master on the Laurentian Library in Florence, Italy.
Michelangelo was not only a great artist, he was a CEO of other talent that col aboratively made
the art that bore his name. To realize his vision of a ful -length animated feature lm, Walt
Disney assembled a great team of diverse talents to create the breakthrough animated feature lm
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. It was Disney’s ability to tolerate diversity, al owing his
group to retain their individuality while combining their talents that created the cooperative
synthesis that made his vision a reality.
Most of us assume that the more you educate people, the more clonelike they become. The
opposite is true: The more you educate people, the more unique and diverse their networks of
associations become. We share few common assumptions with each other. Each of us has the
capacity to make an in nite number of uniquely different associations. - idea word game
The ways people retain their individuality while combining their efforts and talents is critical to
creative col aboration. Understanding that is vital to creating a cooperative synthesis. The fol
owing techniques are some of the best from around the world that are designed to help groups
create a cooperative synthesis:
Brainwriting
Richard Feynman, while working at Los Alamos on the rst atomic bomb, noted that only one
problem was fed into the computer at a time.
Instead of thinking of more ef cient ways of solving one problem at a time, he thought of ways
of processing multiple problems in paral el, spontaneous sequences. He invented a system for
sending three problems through the machine simultaneously. To develop it, he had his team work
with colored cards with a different color for each problem. The cards circled the table in a
multicolored sequence, smal batches occasional y having to pass other batches like impatient
golfers playing through. This simple innovation dramatical y increased idea production and
accelerated the work on the bomb.

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

Horst Geschka and his associates at the Batel e Institute in Frankfurt, Germany, developed a
variety of group creative-thinking techniques cal ed Brainwriting, which, like Feynman’s
innovative problem-solving approach, are designed to process ideas in paral el, spontaneous
sequences. In traditional brainstorming groups, people suggest ideas one at a time. This is serial
processing of information. Brainwriting, in contrast, al ows multiple ideas to be suggested at the
same time. This is paral el processing of information. If a brainwriting group has ten members,

up to ten ideas wil be generated for every one generated in a typical brainstorming session of ten
members. Brainwriting increases idea production dramatical y.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TThe basic guidelines are

1. First, discuss the problem to clarify it. Write the problem in a location visible to al group
members.
2. Distribute index cards to each participant and instruct them to silently write their ideas on the
cards, one idea per card. Whereas group brainstorming involves participants shouting ideas out
loud, brainwriting has people silently writing down ideas.
3. As participants complete their cards, they pass them silently to the person on the right.
4. Tel the group members to read the cards they are passed and to regard them as “stimulation”
cards. Write down any new ideas inspired by the “stimulation” cards on blank cards and pass
them to the person on their right. Within a few minutes, several idea cards wil be rotating around
the table.
5. After twenty to thirty minutes, col ect al cards and have the group members tape them to a
wal . The cards should be arranged into columns according to different categories of ideas, with a
title card above each column. Eliminate the duplicates.
6. Evaluate the ideas by giving each participant a packet of self-sticking dots and have them
place the dots on their preferred ideas. They can al ocate the dots in any manner desired, placing
them al on one idea, one each on ve different ideas, or any other combination.
Only one person can offer an idea at a time during brainstorming, and despite encouragement to
let loose, some people hold back out of inhibition or for fear of ridicule. Brainwriting ensures
that the loudest voices don’t prevail. Participants feel less pressure from managers and bosses,
and ideas can’t be shot down as soon as they are offered. You can design your own
“brainwriting” format based on two principles:
1. Idea generation is silent.
2. Ideas are created spontaneously in paral el.
Idea Pool

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

fi

Ask participants to silently generate ideas on index cards and place their cards in the

center of the table instead of passing them to the person on their right. Whenever a participant
wants or needs a stimulation card, they simply exchange their cards for cards from the pool.
Gallery

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

This technique reverses the normal process. Instead of moving ideas around for people

to examine, the gal ery moves people around. Post sheets of ip-chart paper (one per participant)
around the room. Participants stand silently and write their ideas on the sheets (one sheet per
person) for ten to fteen minutes. Then the participants are al owed fteen minutes to walk
around the “gal ery” and look at the other ideas and take notes. Now, using the other ideas to
stimulate further thought, participants return to their sheets and add to or re ne their ideas. After
about ten minutes of additional writing, the participants examine al the ideas and select the best
ones.
Another option for the gal ery technique is to ask participants to draw or diagram their ideas
instead of listing them Drawing and diagramming is useful in creative
thinking to recover information from memory that would otherwise be unavailable. For example,
how many windows are there in your house?
Diagramming your house al ows you to inspect and count the windows. Creative insights
sometimes occur as a result of drawing or diagramming a problem, because they help us notice
certain features that may be overlooked.
Post sheets of ip-chart paper and then ask the participants to draw a sketch or diagram of how
the problem might be solved. Then the participants are again al owed to walk around the “gal
ery” and take notes. Using the notes, they return and re ne their own sketches. The group then
examines al the sketches and constructs a nal solution from parts of different sketches.
Three Plus

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TEach participant silently writes three ideas on the tops of sheets of paper, one idea per

sheet. The sheets are passed to the person on their right.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

That person is asked to write down an idea that improves on the one listed at the top of the sheet.
If participants have dif culty improving on the idea, ask them to list new ones. Do this for al
three ideas. After ve minutes or so, the idea sheets are again passed to the right. Continue the
process until al members receive their original papers.

Airplanes

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

Have each participant construct a paper airplane. Each participant writes down an idea

on the airplane and sends it ying to another participant.
Upon reading what’s been written on the airplane, he or she writes down a modi cation or
improvement of that idea, or an entirely fresh possibility, and then sends it ying to someone
else. Continue the exercise for twenty minutes and then col ect and categorize the ideas.
Wall of Ideas

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T-

Each participant silently writes ideas on Post-it notes. While the group is writing ideas,

the leader col ects and pastes them on a wal . Then, 1. When the group is nished generating
ideas, the leader reads aloud al the ideas to make sure everyone understands them. If written
comments are necessary to clarify the idea, the leader writes it on the note in a different color.
2. The next step is to organize the ideas. Ask the group to come up to the wal and sort the ideas
out in some meaningful way. As the ideas are reorganized, the leader wil periodical y interject
questions as to what the topic or criterion is for a partial y sorted set of ideas. Eventual y, the
ideas wil be sorted into different sets of ideas.
3. The leader labels each set of ideas with a topic card and pastes it over the idea set. Do this for
each separate set of ideas. Some topics can be divided into subtopics for further sorting of ideas.
4. Participants can elaborate on ideas or express concerns by writing their thoughts on additional
Post-It notes and pasting them next to the idea or idea set.
5. Prioritize the ideas by giving each participant ten self-sticking dots. The participants prioritize
the ideas by placing a dot or dots on the ideas. They can place as many as they wish on an idea.
6. The nal step is to capture the end result of the group into a document that is typed and
distributed to each of the participants.

fi

fl

fi

fl

fi

Notebooks

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TIn art, there is a group of artists who cal themselves futurists. They col aborate on a

work, with each artist working on it separately at different times. When the picture is nished,
they cannot tel who painted what. The result is usual y a remarkable product that re ects several
different points of view combined into something different over time. Col aboration over time
creates a different dimension and different understanding of a subject in art.
Similarly, a smal group can col aborate over time in problem solving to create a deeper
understanding and appreciation of the possibilities. The guidelines are
1. Participants are each given a notebook containing problem information and instructions. Each
participant writes at least three ideas per day in the notebook for one week.
2. The participants exchange the notebooks with each other every week. Participants can then use
the ideas in the new notebooks to trigger, through association, new ideas.
3. The exchange of ideas should stop after four weeks, even if al notebooks haven’t made the
rounds. The coordinator col ects the notebooks, categorizes the ideas, and prepares a summary.
The participants gather in a group to discuss the ideas generated.
Two-Week Brainstorming

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TA variation of the notebook technique is to rst brief the group about the problem or

subject to be brainstormed and then to ask participants to work on the problem alone for a week
and to record their ideas in notebooks. Then, 1. At the end of the week, the individuals bring their
notebooks to a group session. Each participant expresses his or her ideas verbal y (approximately
ten minutes each). The rest of the group is encouraged to discuss the ideas and to develop new
ideas around them.
2. Participants are encouraged to record relevant points and ideas in their notebooks.
3. At the end of the group session, participants are then asked to spend another week to do further
creative thinking. They can now consider the new concepts and ideas they heard from others or
improve their own ideas in light of what they have learned from the group session.

fi

fl

fi

4. At the end of the second week, the group meets again to harvest the ideas, which are then
shared, prioritized, and evaluated.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
T*Mixed Sessions*

You could also combine individual and group creative thinking in one session. The session starts
with a group brainstorming session to de ne the subject and to develop as many ideas as
possible. Then a speci c creative-thinking technique is suggested by the facilitator, for example,
forcing a connection between the subject and random words as described in “Connecting the
Unconnected.” The group breaks up and each participant goes off to work on his or her own to
use the technique to generate additional ideas, for ten minutes or so. The group is then
reassembled and the new ideas are discussed and developed further. If new ideas are desired, a
fresh technique is introduced by the facilitator for further individual working. The key is that al
individual work is directed by the use of speci c techniques. The process is repeated until the
group is satis ed with the output.
Clustering

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TClustering is a technique that combines the silent generation of ideas with the random

clustering of people and ideas. It was inspired by the work of Igor Stravinsky, the genius of
modernism in music, who never lost his eagerness to try something new. The Soldier’s Tale in
1918 was a landmark departure from traditional performance styles by introducing the concept of
“clusters” of performers (dancers, narrator, and instrumentalists) who saw themselves uniquely
re-creating the composer’s work, each performance being a new experiment. The guidelines are
1. Discuss and post a general chal enge.
Example: “In what ways might we create a more innovative corporation?”
2. Each participant writes eight responses or ideas on cards, one idea per card.
3. The facilitator col ects and shuf es the cards from the entire group.
4. The facilitator randomly distributes three cards to each participant. Make sure that no
participant receives his or her original cards. Ask everyone to study the cards and to arrange
them in order of personal preference. The facilitator spreads the leftover cards on a table face up.
5. Ask participants to exchange the cards they don’t like with those on the table. Al ow a couple
of minutes for this activity.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

6. Next, ask participants to exchange cards with each other. Every participant must exchange at
least one card and may exchange any number.

7. Ask participants to form clusters. There is no limit to the number of participants who may join
the same cluster, but no cluster may keep more than three cards.
8. Instruct each cluster to prepare a creative way to present their three ideas to the group. They
might create a graphic poster, bumper sticker, slogan, logo, T-shirt, television commercial, song,
and so on.
A variation of “clustering” is to rst ask participants to write as many ideas as they can on index
cards for ve minutes, one idea per card. Then, 1. Divide the group into teams of three to six
members, depending upon the size of the group.
2. The team members pool their cards, which they rank in order of preference.
3. Ask the team to select the top ve ideas and to place the rest on a table face up. The other
teams are free to review the discarded ideas and use them if they wish.
4. The teams discuss the ideas and are free to replace them with new ideas, if and when they
occur (but the team can only retain ve at any one time). They are encouraged to re ne or
improve upon the ideas they have selected.
5. Al the teams, meeting together, share the ideas verbal y.
6. The group prioritizes the ideas and shortens the list to the ve most promising. 7. The group
elaborates on these ideas and then assesses and evaluates them.
Open Meetings

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TOpen brainstorming meetings give al employees—from janitors to CEOs—the

opportunity and the motivation to suggest ideas. The purpose behind the formlessness of an open
meeting is to let ideas take their own shape, undistorted by status or personal politics. Open
meetings are governed by a few simple guidelines, a general theme, and very loose time limits.
There is no agenda for the meeting. Someone reads the meeting’s general theme aloud and
invites everyone to identify a related issue for which they assume responsibility. When someone
suggests an issue, that person writes it on a large sheet of paper, reads it aloud, and posts it on
one of the wal s. This process continues until al the issues have been posted.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

The next phase is known as the “idea marketplace.” During it, everyone is invited to sign up on
one of the large “issue” sheets to discuss the issue. Participants can sign up for as many groups
as they wish. Sponsors of each issue convene their groups to side rooms, discuss the issue, and
record any ideas or other information suggested. Ideal y, several smal er rooms near the larger
meeting room should be available where the smal groups can convene and pursue their issue.
Each smal group should honor the “law of two feet.” The law is if any participant becomes bored
or has nothing to contribute to the group, honor the group and walk away.

Another way to conduct an open meeting is to do it over a computer network by designing a
computer linkup to give everyone in the company access to open group discussions. Employees
can send and receive real-time messages and tap into a central database where a general theme is
posted, for example, “How can we reduce expenses?” People post issues that relate to the general
theme and others get in touch with each other to interact about the issues that interest them. They
can cal up the results of their discussions, at their convenience, and send each other e-mail
messages until they generate the ideas they want.
KJ Brainstorming
A leading creativity researcher, psychologist Howard Gruber of the University of Geneva,
indicates that in the creative process, slight shifts of perspective go on al the time, at various
scales, before the creative solution is reached. These shifts occur when one identi es a nuance. A
nuance is a shade of meaning or subtlety of perception. Many, many smal shifts couple together
over time, eventual y producing a major shift of perception.
Potential y, a group brainstorming session generates quantities of ideas, with each idea ful of
potential nuances. Each idea is saturated with shades of meaning. Yet, our usual pattern of
organizing a group session is to take a reductionist approach rather than let ideas evolve out of
the dimensions of nuances, as a creator would.
Jiro Kawakita, professor at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, developed a brainstorming
technique that al ows an idea to shape its course according to the neutral facts and nuances of the
situation. In Japan it’s known as the kami—kire ho, which means “scrap-paper technique.” It’s
cal ed “scrap paper,” because original y Kawakita had participants write thoughts and ideas on
scrap paper. The technique is commonly referred to in the West as simply KJ.
The technique synthesizes different individual perspectives and experiences into a problem
de nition and solution that is acceptable to the group. There are two types of activity in KJ:
understanding the problem and solving the problem. Understanding the problem is getting each
member of the group to get a sense of the essence of the problem de nition; solving the problem
means encouraging al members to participate in suggesting solutions.
For example, a problem might be disposing of cooking-oil waste. Understanding the problem is
to be sensitive to the relevant facts, subtleties, and nuances of disposing of it in its liquid form.
What are the neutral facts? How is it disposed? What damage does it cause? What facts are
relevant? What facts are veri able?

fi

fi

fi

fi

Once facts are col ected, solutions are proposed. One suggested solution would be some sort of
inexpensive vegetable additive, which contains no chemicals, that you mix into the hot oil so that
when the mixture cools, it becomes a solid for disposal with regular garbage. Or another
suggestion might be to add a chemical additive to the cooking oil that could transform the oil
into fertilizer for gardens. And so on.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TThe procedures for KJ are:

1. Problem De nition. The group leader cites a general area of concern (e.g., sales, costs,
distribution, competition).
A. Each person writes facts on index cards that are related to this one concern, writing one fact
per card, on as many cards as they wish.
The idea is to get people to think of everything they can that may be pertinent to the problem.
B. The group leader col ects and distributes the cards so no person receives his or her own cards.
C. The group leader then reads one card aloud.
D. Participants nd cards in their stacks that contain related facts and read these aloud, building a
set. A set is a col ection of cards with related facts.
E. The group gives the set a name that they al agree re ects the essence of the set and puts it on a
name-set card. The name must meet the fol owing conditions: • It can be veri ed by using the
facts from which it was generated.
• It should not be too general.
• It should not be a simple aggregation of the subset facts.
Naming the set means boiling down the key facts of a problem and then extracting the essence or
essentials of the problem.
F. The group continues until al the facts are in name sets, and then the group combines the name
sets until there is one al -inclusive group that they name, agreeing that the name re ects the
essence of the al -inclusive problem de nition set. The nal set should include al the facts and
name-essences previously formulated in the subsets.
This nal al -inclusive name set should end up being the closest approximation of the de nition
and essence of the problem. It should represent a consensus de nition and understanding of the
problem. The purpose of sorting facts into sets is to bring about new ways of thinking about old
categories and les of facts.
Kawakita believed that when the group has a common understanding of the problem, it comes
into alignment. Alignment means that each person in the group af rms the problem de nition
and shares in a communion, a feeling of personal support with each member of the group.
2. Problem Solution. Each member writes suggested solutions and ideas on cards, one solution
per card. Each writes as many solutions as one wishes. The goal is to produce 100 cards or more.
A. The group leader col ects the cards and distributes the cards so that no person receives his or
her own cards.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

B. The leader reads one proposed idea out loud.

C. Members select solutions on their cards that relate to the one that was read aloud. Continue
until al related solutions are read. This builds a solution set.
D. The set is named and a name-set card is written for it. Continue until al the solutions are
placed in sets and until an al -inclusive solution set is obtained. The nal solution set’s essence
should encompass al the previously suggested solutions.
The title for the nal solution set should capture the essence of al the suggestions. Ask the group,
“What is the essence of the properties and characteristics that are indispensable to these ideas?”
This question should inspire a number of ideas and thoughts Final y the facilitator should ask
participants for additional ideas that come to mind. These ideas may be related or unrelated or
they may be different perspectives on the problem. The facilitator should graphical y depict these
to make
it easier to understand their meaning and relationship to one another.
The idea is to build a visual conceptual picture.
When participants produce cards, the problem de nition expands; and when they compress the
cards into name-sets, the problem de nition contracts. The expanding and contracting of sets
squeezes the information out of its usual categories into its many subtleties and nuances. It is the
group’s awareness of the subtleties and nuances of the problem that changes the context in which
the problem is seen. This change in context may lead to the sudden solution or the sudden idea.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TNHK

Another technique designed to squeeze out nuances is NHK, which was developed by Hiroshi
Takahashi at the Japan Broadcasting Company (NHK). This method works like an eggbeater,
churning ideas again and again to produce new ideas. The guidelines are 1. In response to a
problem statement, participants write down ve ideas on separate cards.
2. Participants form into teams of ve. Each person explains his or her ideas to the other
members of the team. Other members write down any new ideas that come to mind on separate
cards.
3. The cards are col ected and sorted into groups of related themes.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

4. New teams of two or three people are formed. Each group takes one or more of the sorted
groups of cards and brainstorms for ideas that are related to those on the cards. This lasts up to
half an hour. The new ideas are also written on cards.

5. At the end of this session, each group organizes its cards by theme and presents the ideas to
the rest of the group. Al ideas are written on a chalkboard or ip chart by the facilitator for al to
see.
6. Participants are formed into new groups of ten people each, and they brainstorm
improvements regarding the ideas on the chalkboard or ip chart, one idea at a time.
*Storyboarding*
Leonardo da Vinci used to pin his ideas up on a wal and examine them over time. This visual
display of ideas enabled him to see how one idea related to another and how al the pieces came
together. A popular American technique of displaying information on a wal is the storyboard.
In 1928 Walt Disney and his artists were working on his rst talking cartoon Steamboat Willie.
Disney wanted ful animation. To animate everything required thousands of drawings. They were
piled in stacks al over the place. It was hard to know what had been nished and what stil needed
to be done. They had to have meetings al the time, just to nd out what was going on.
Walt Disney came up with the idea of having his artists pin their drawings on the wal s of the
studio in sequence so he could see in a glance how far along the project was. Each scene was
then used as a point around which a complete story could be told. The story was told on a wal
covered with a special kind of board, hence the term “storyboard.”
Storyboarding quickly became a routine part of Disney’s planning procedure for both animated
and live-action lms. He could walk in at any time of the day or night and see progress on any
given project at a glance. Storyboards kept branching out into many uses. Disneyland and Walt
Disney World were both “operational y” planned using storyboards.
Mike Vance recognized the problem-solving potential for this technique and was the rst to
re ne it into a brainstorming technique. A variety of related procedures for generating ideas has
evolved since then. Although there are some signi cant differences among the procedures, al of
them share the common feature begun by Walt Disney: laying out key concepts that are linked
together to form a complete whole.

Awakening the Collaborative Spirit
TStoryboarding can be likened to taking your thoughts and the thoughts of others and

making them visible, by spreading them on a wal as you work on your problem. Fol owing are
basic guidelines used by many storyboarding methods:
1. Topic. Tape or pin the topic card on the wal . In our example, the topic is to “create a new
restaurant.”

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fl

fi

fi

fi

2. Purpose. Normal y, most people start with a “purpose” header, which helps the group
brainstorm the purposes for pursuing a particular topic. Each brainstormed purpose is written on

a card and posted beneath the “purpose” card. For example, among the possible purposes for
starting an new restaurant are making money, ful l ing a need, and serving the customer.
3. Headers. Identify and list “headers,” which are primarily the major issues, attributes, or
solution categories of the process. Each one is written on a card and posted. Our example has
these headers: “purpose,” “name,” “location,” “theme,” “architecture,” “atmosphere,” “seating,”
“menu,” “employees,” “entertainment,” and “miscel aneous.” Arrange and rearrange the headers
until you come up with the sequence that best tel s the story. 4. Miscellaneous. It’s a good idea to
include a “miscel aneous” header to contain al those items that don’t t within the other
categories.
Place thoughts in this column as the rest of the columns are brainstormed. Some of these may
become separate headers themselves if enough similar items appear in the miscel aneous column.
In our example, suppose participants listed several advertising and marketing suggestions and
ideas. These ideas would create additional headers, or if signi cant enough, might merit separate
storyboards.
5. Brainstorm. Group members use each category as a stimulus for problem solutions and write
these ideas, solutions, and thoughts on cards. Each card is posted beneath the appropriate header
card. For example, al the brainstormed names for the new restaurant would be posted underneath
the “Name” header, al the suggested menu items would be listed under the “Menu” header, and
so on.
During a storyboard session, consider al ideas relevant, no matter how impractical they appear.
Encourage the group to think positively and defer judgment until a later time. Once the ideas
start owing, those working with the storyboard wil become immersed in the problem and wil
“hitchhike” onto other ideas to create additional ideas. Encourage participants to examine the
solutions and try to generate additional ideas from them or combine solutions across categories
and use them as stimuli for new ideas.
6. Flexibility. Keep the storyboard exible and dynamic. As ideas and suggestions accumulate,
you may nd it necessary to add more headers. For example, in our restaurant example,
“environment” could be split into “physical environment” and “atmosphere.” Think of the board
as a living, dynamic thing that is constantly evolving toward the ideal solution.
7. Incubate. The process continues until the group generates a suf cient number of ideas or time
is cal ed. It’s usual y a good idea to brainstorm for ideas using a storyboard over a time period of
a few days or weeks to al ow the ideas to incubate and cross-fertilize.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

fi

fl

8. Materials. You can use a wide variety of materials to create your storyboard: cork boards,
white boards, chalkboards, or wal s, anything that provides a surface where you can add, delete,
or move things around. You can use different colors to distinguish headers and columns.

The beauty of storyboarding is in its exibility and adaptability to your needs. You can modify
the guidelines to meet your requirements. It’s a good idea to keep the process simple at rst.
After you’ve become comfortable with it, you can expand it at wil .

Afterword
Darwin’s notes show Gould taking him through al the birds he had named. Gould kept ipopping back and forth about the number of different species of nches: The information was
there, but he didn’t quite know what to make of it. He assumed that since God made one set of
birds when he created the world, the specimens from different locations would be identical. It
didn’t occur to him to look for differences by location. Gould thought that the birds were so
different that they might be distinct species.
What was remarkable to me about the encounter is the completely different impact it had on the
two men. Gould thought the way he had been taught to think, like an expert taxonomist, and
didn’t see, in the nches, the textbook example of evolution unfolding right before him. Darwin
didn’t even know they were nches. So the guy who had the intel igence, knowledge, and the
expertise didn’t see the differences, and the guy with far less knowledge and expertise came up
with an idea that shaped the way we think about the world.
Darwin came up with the idea because he was a productive thinker.

fi

fi

fl

fi

fl

fi

He generated a multiplicity of perspectives and theories. Gould would compare new ideas and
theories with his existing patterns of experience. He thought reproductively. If the ideas didn’t t
with what he had been taught, he rejected them as worthless. On the other hand, Darwin was wil
ing to disregard what past thinkers thought and was wil ing to entertain different perspectives and
different theories to see where they would lead.

fi

fl

Depending on which system you use, you’l need push pins, scissors, wide marking pens, chalk,
and a supply of cards, Post-it notes, or Jotz notes. Take a photograph of the completed board so it
can be reconstructed and reworked in the future, if necessary.

We entered school as a question mark and graduated as a period.
We tend to develop narrow ideas and stick with them until proven wrong. Let’s say that to
advertise our product, we use television commercials during a popular prime-time sitcom. We are
fairly happy with the results, and the television campaign seems to work. Are we going to check
out other ideas that we don’t think wil be as good or better? Are we likely to explore alternative
ways to advertise our product? Probably not.
The profound discovery Watson made was that most people process the same information over
and over until proven wrong, without searching for alternatives, even when there is no penalty
for asking questions that give them a negative answer. In his hundreds of experiments, he,
incredibly, never had an instance in which someone spontaneously offered an alternative
hypotheses to nd out if it were true. In short, his subjects didn’t even try to nd out if there is a
simpler—or even another—rule.

They say the numbers increase by 2 when the rule is simply that the numbers increase. They can
ask as many questions as they want. What they do is test increasing by 2 get it con rmed and
then go with that.
Creative geniuses don’t think this way. The creative genius wil always look for alternative ways
to think about a subject. Even when the old ways are wel established, the geniuses wil invent
new ways of thinking. If something doesn’t work, they look at it several different ways until they
nd a new line of thought. It is this wil ingness to entertain different perspectives and alternative
ideas that broadens their thinking and opens them up to new information and the new
possibilities that the rest of us don’t see.

Summary
In summary, creative geniuses are productive thinkers. To change the way you think and become
a more productive thinker, you need to learn how to think like a genius. When you need original
ideas or creative solutions for your business and personal problems, you need to
• Generate a multiplicity of different perspectives about your subject until you nd the
perspective you want. Genius often comes from nding a new perspective that no one else has
taken.

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

• Generate a large quantity of alternatives and conjectures. From this quantity, retain the best
ideas for further development and elaboration.

fi

fi

Most us are educated to think like John Gould. We were al born as spontaneous, creative
thinkers. Yet a great deal of our education may be regarded as the inculcation of mind-sets. We
were taught how to handle problems and new phenomena with xed mental attitudes (based on
what past thinkers thought) that predetermine our response to problems or situations. In short, we
were taught “what” to think instead of “how” to think.

•Produce variation in your ideas by incorporating random, chance, or unrelated factors.
As I wrote these nal words, I was reminded of an ancient Chinese story about a rainmaker who
was hired to bring rain to a parched part of China. The rainmaker, a smal , wizened, old man,
upon arriving, sniffed the air with obvious disgust as he got out of his cart and asked to be left
alone in a cottage outside the vil age; even his meals were to be left outside the door.
Nothing was heard from him for three days. Then it not only rained, but there was also a big
downfal of snow, unknown at that time of the year.
Very much impressed, the vil agers sought him out and asked him how he could make it rain and
even snow. The rainmaker replied, “I have not made the rain or the snow; I am not responsible
for it.” The vil agers insisted that they had been in the midst of a terrible drought until he came,
and then after three days they even had quantities of snow.
“Oh, I can explain that. You see, the rain and snow were always here. But as soon as I got here, I
saw that your minds were out of order and that you had forgotten how to see. So I remained here
until once more you could see what was always right before your eyes.”
It is my hope that the strategies in this book wil show you how to look for different ways to think
about your problems. When you do that, you wil rethink the way you see things, and you, like
the Chinese vil agers, wil see what is right before your eyes.

____________________________________________________________________________________

fi

15.

1. SEEING WHAT NO ONE ELSE IS SEEING
Knowing How to See
Genius often comes from nding a new perspective that no one else has taken.
Before you brainstorm any problem, restate the problem at least ve to ten times to generate
multiple perspectives. The emphasis is not so much on the right problem de nition but on
alternative problem de nitions. Sooner or later, you’l nd one that you are comfortable with.

Making Your Thought Visible

2. THINKING WHAT NO ONE ELSE IS THINKING
Possibility thinking then (maximum number of ideas), After you’ve created the maximum
number of ideas possible, you change your strategy to practicality thinking, the evaluation and
judgment of ideas, to nd the ideas that have the most value to you.

Thinking Fluently
Making Novel Combinations
Connecting the Unconnected
Looking at the Other Side
Looking in Other Worlds
Finding What You Are Not Looking For
Awakening the Collaborative Spirit

Con rmed Comprehensive List of Techniques in "Cracking Creativity":

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

fi

5 Whys
5W1H (Who, What, Where, When, Why, and How)

1.
2.

fi

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Abstracting the Problem
Af nity Diagrams
Analogies
Analogy and Metaphor
Ask "Why?" multiple times
Attribute Listing
Bionics
Biomimicry
Brain Drawing
Brainstorming
Brainwriting
Break down the problem into smaller components
Catalog Technique
Change Context
Checklists
Clustering
Collaborative Sketches
Combination Tables
Combinatory Play
Combine different viewpoints
Combining Problems
Combining Words
Component Analysis
Concept Mapping
Consider the problem in different contexts or scenarios
Connecting the Unconnected
Cross-Disciplinary Analogies
Cross-Disciplinary Thinking
Da Vinci’s Technique
Delphi Method
Devil’s Advocate
Diagrams
Diagramming
Dictionary
Divergent Thinking
Dot Voting

Elaboration
Encourage team members to share their unique perspectives
Error Analysis
Excursions
Exquisite Corpse
Facilitating
Fishbone Diagrams
Flowcharts
Forced Connections
Forced Relationships
Frame the problem in terms of positive actions
Free Writing
Heuristic Ideation Technique
Identify components and interactions
Idea Quotas
Improvisation
Interaction Matrices
Inventive Problem Solving (TRIZ)
List characteristics
List Making
Look at the problem from different stakeholders’ viewpoints
Lotus Blossom Technique
Make positive action statements
Make it more global and speci c
Making Novel Combinations
Matrix Analysis
Mind Mapping
Morphological Analysis
Multiple Perspectives
Nominal Group Technique
Open-Ended Exploration
Opposite Thinking
Playfulness
Post-it Notes
Prioritization Grids
Prototyping

fi

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

Pugh Matrix
Random Draw
Random Input
Random Objects
Random Stimuli
Random Words
Recording
Rephrase the problem statement
Reverse Assumptions
SCAMPER (Substitute, Combine, Adapt, Modify, Put to another
use, Eliminate, Reverse)
85. Separate the parts from the whole
86. Serendipity
87. Silent Idea Generation
88. Similes
89. Six Thinking Hats
90. SIT (Systematic Inventive Thinking)
91. Storyboarding
92. Switch perspective
93. SWOT Analysis
94. Synectics
95. System Mapping
96. TQR (Thinker-Questioner-Re ector) Technique
97. TRIZ (Theory of Inventive Problem Solving)
98. Two-Week Brainstorming
99. Use af rmative language to describe desired outcomes
100. Use different contexts or scenarios
101. Use multiple perspectives
102. Use open-ended questions
103. Use real-world testing
104. Use feedback loops
105. Use synonyms and antonyms to alter the meaning
106. Visual Analogies
107. Visual Brainstorming
108. Visual Synectics
109. Wishful Thinking

fl

fi

75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.

Assigning Techniques to Stages:
1. Identifying the Problem
5 Whys
•
5W1H (Who, What, Where, When, Why, and How)
•
Ask "Why?" multiple times
•
Change Context
•
Consider the problem in different contexts or scenarios
•
Look at the problem from different stakeholders’ viewpoints
•
Use different contexts or scenarios
•
Use multiple perspectives
•
Use open-ended questions
•
2. Understanding the Problem
Abstracting the Problem
•
Break down the problem into smaller components
•
Component Analysis
•
Diagramming
•
Fishbone Diagrams
•
Identify components and interactions
•
System Mapping
•
3. Generating and Recording Ideas
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Attribute Listing
Bionics
Biomimicry
Brain Drawing
Brainstorming
Brainwriting
Catalog Technique
Checklists
Combination Tables
Combinatory Play
Combining Problems
Combining Words

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Connecting the Unconnected
Deferring Judgment
Dictionary
Divergent Thinking
Dot Voting
Elaboration
Encourage team members to share their unique perspectives
Error Analysis
Excursions
Exquisite Corpse
Forced Connections
Forced Relationships
Free Writing
Heuristic Ideation Technique
Idea Quotas
Improvisation
Interaction Matrices
Inventive Problem Solving (TRIZ)
List characteristics
List Making
Lotus Blossom Technique
Making Novel Combinations
Mind Mapping
Morphological Analysis
Multiple Perspectives
Nominal Group Technique
Open-Ended Exploration
Opposite Thinking
Playfulness
Post-it Notes
Prioritization Grids
Random Draw
Random Input
Random Objects
Random Stimuli
Random Words

Rephrase the problem statement
Reverse Assumptions
SCAMPER (Substitute, Combine, Adapt, Modify, Put to another
use, Eliminate, Reverse)
Silent Idea Generation
•
Similes
•
Six Thinking Hats
•
SIT (Systematic Inventive Thinking)
•
Storyboarding
•
Switch perspective
•
Synectics
•
TQR (Thinker-Questioner-Re ector) Technique
•
Two-Week Brainstorming
•
Use af rmative language to describe desired outcomes
•
Use synonyms and antonyms to alter the meaning
•
Visual Analogies
•
Visual Brainstorming
•
Visual Synectics
•
Wishful Thinking
•
4. Visualizing and Structuring Ideas
•
•
•

Diagrams
•
Fishbone Diagrams
•
Mind Mapping
•
System Mapping
•
Visual Analogies
•
Visual Brainstorming
•
Visual Synectics
•
5. Evaluating and Re ning Ideas

fl

Af nity Diagrams
Dot Voting
Elaboration
Error Analysis
Matrix Analysis
Prioritization Grids

fi

fi

fi

•
•
•
•
•
•

Pugh Matrix
•
SWOT Analysis
•
6. Collaborating and Facilitating Group Ideation
Collaborative Sketches
•
Delphi Method
•
Encourage team members to share their unique perspectives
•
Facilitating
•
Group Brainstorming
•
Nominal Group Technique
•
Silent Idea Generation
•
Two-Week Brainstorming
•
7. Implementing and Testing Solutions
•
•
•
•
•
•

Prototyping
Seeking Accidental Discoveries
SIT (Systematic Inventive Thinking)
TRIZ (Theory of Inventive Problem Solving)
Use feedback loops
Use real-world testing

